Mr. Thiessen discusses international developments and the prospects for the
Canadian economy   Notes for remarks by the Governor of the Bank of Canada, Mr.  Gordon
Thiessen, in Saint John, New Brunswick on 5/2/98.
A  year  ago,  in  early  1997,  prospects  for  global  economic  growth  were  very
promising.  World  economic  activity  had  strengthened  and  was  expected  to  accelerate  further,
with the benefit of low inflation, reduced fiscal imbalances, and stable or declining interest rates.
In Canada too, output and employment growth had picked up. And the economy was expected to
gain momentum in 1997, supported by strong US demand and the lowest domestic interest rates
in many years. Low inflation and a dramatic improvement in our fiscal situation had made those
low interest rates possible.
Today,  the  views  about  the  global  economy  are  more  mixed.  The  buildup  of
events in Asia since last summer has cast a cloud over the economic picture. The International
Monetary  Fund  (IMF)  and  the  Organisation  for  Economic  Co-operation  and  Development
(OECD)  have  scaled  back  their  projections  for  world  economic  growth  this  year.  In  early
December, they suggested that global output growth could be ¾ to 1 percentage point slower in
1998 than previously expected.
But  the  news  on  the  external  side  is  certainly  not  all  negative.  There  have  also
been some positive surprises recently. For example, the underlying economic momentum in our
major trading partners, other than Japan, looks to be stronger than expected a few months ago.
And  longer-term  interest  rates  have  been  declining  in  most  industrial  countries,  which  should
help underpin global economic expansion.
Today, I would like to give you an update on the Canadian economy and discuss
the prospects for the period ahead in light of the latest international developments.
My  conclusion  and  main  message  is  that,  even  with  the  current  uncertainties  on
the external horizon,  Canada’s  economic  outlook  remains  positive.  An  important  basis  for  this
conclusion  is  that  the  underlying  foundations  of  the  Canadian  economy  are  sounder  than  they
have been for many years. Thus, we are in a better position to weather the impact of unexpected
international developments and to make progress in generating higher incomes and employment.
How did we do in 1997?
Let us start with a quick look at our economic performance in 1997. Based on the
most  recent  information  available,  the  Bank  of  Canada  estimates  that  the  Canadian  economy
expanded at a rate of about 4 per cent from the fourth quarter of 1996 to  the  fourth  quarter  of
1997.  Exports  were  the  mainstay  of  the  economic  recovery  until  mid-1996;  but  since  then  the
expansion has become more broadly based. Over the past year and a half, spending by Canadian
households  on  consumer  goods  and  by  businesses  on  investments  in  technology  and  new
equipment has been the driving force in the economy.
The  strong  pickup  in  economic  activity  has  also  contributed  to  a  substantial
increase  in  employment.  Over  380,000  new  jobs  were  created  in  the  private  sector  last  year,
offsetting  many  times  over  the  13,000  jobs  lost  in  the  public  sector  because  of  restructuring.
Even more encouraging is the fact that a good part of this increase in employment  represented
full-time jobs. Moreover, the unemployment rate  fell  to  8.6  per  cent  by  year-end  from  9.8  per
cent at the end of 1996.
BIS Review   7/1998
- 2 -
Inflation has remained low, and within our target range of 1 to 3 per cent for most
of  1997,  although  it  did  end  the  year  somewhat  below  target.  Some  of  the  factors  that
contributed  to  this  recent  greater-than-expected  slowing  in  the  trend  of  inflation  are  of  a
temporary  nature  and  are  expected  to  unwind  in  coming  months.  But  some  of  the  other
dampening influences at work may be more persistent than seemed  likely  earlier.  So,  although
we see the trend of inflation moving back inside the target range in the near future, on balance it
will probably be somewhat lower in 1998 than previously expected.
I would also like to underline the additional progress made during the year in the
area of public finances, where government deficits have been further reduced. More importantly,
the  ratio  of  public  debt  relative  to  the  size  of  our  economy  is  finally  falling.  This  is  a  major
contribution towards the sounder economic foundations that I mentioned earlier.
Altogether then, 1997 turned out to be a good year for the Canadian economy.
Prospects for 1998 and the ’Asian factor’
But  what  about  prospects  for  the  current  year?  How  important  are  the  latest
international events when viewed from a Canadian perspective? And what is their likely impact
on our economy?
There is no doubt that what started as financial turbulence related to difficulties in
Thailand has become a more widespread problem than anyone would have thought likely some
months  back.  An  erosion  of  market  confidence  led  to  strong  downward  pressure  on  exchange
rates  and  to  sharply  higher  interest  rates  in  the  affected  South-East  Asian  countries  and,
subsequently,  in  South  Korea.  These  market  difficulties  in  turn  uncovered  and  exacerbated
financial and economic weaknesses that had been plaguing these countries for some time.
The  international  community,  including  Canada,  has  taken  steps,  primarily
through  the  IMF,  to  help  these  countries  deal  with  their  problems.  Some  of  the  initial
uncertainties involved in setting up and getting these IMF adjustment programs going have been
resolved.  And  there  are  now  some  encouraging  signs  of  improved  confidence  and  financial
stability in the region.
Among  the  industrial  countries,  Japan  is  the  one  most  affected  by  the  spillover
effects from its Asian trading partners. Not only are its trade links with them important, but this
external shock comes at a time when the Japanese domestic economy is much less buoyant than
was anticipated earlier. Substantial loan exposure by Japanese banks to the Asian region has also
weakened an already ailing financial sector in that country. But it is important to note that Japan
has the financial wherewithal to deal with its banking difficulties and that a series of measures to
combat  these  problems  and  to  strengthen  the  economic  recovery  have  already  been  taken.
Additional financial sector and fiscal measures were announced recently.
At  this  stage,  the  situation  in  Asia  is  still  evolving,  and,  while  prospects  have
improved, we cannot be sure just how quickly and effectively the South-East Asian, Korean, and
Japanese economies will respond to the adjustment measures that have been taken.
What about the potential effects of all this on Canada? Since our trade with Asia,
including  Japan,  makes  up  less  than  10  per  cent  of  our  total  exports,  the  direct  effects  will  be
relatively modest. But we must also take into account the indirect effects that work through our
other  major  trading  partners  and  through  the  prices  of  some  of  the  products  we  sell  abroad.
BIS Review   7/1998
- 3 -
Indeed,  the  implications  of  the  Asian  crisis  for  global  economic  growth  and  for  primary
commodity prices on world markets will probably have a more important impact on Canada than
the reduction of our exports to Asia.
The fallout from Asia will no doubt have a dampening effect on Canadian output
growth  for  the  current  year.  But  there  are  also  other,  more  positive,  developments  that  could
well work to mitigate this effect. As I said before, economic performance in our major trading
partners in the West, particularly the United States, has been somewhat stronger than anticipated.
And even though our short-term interest rates have risen, Canadian longer-term rates have been
falling,  along  with  their  counterparts  in  the  United  States  and  Europe,  reflecting  declining
inflation and lower inflation-risk premiums. These longer-term rates are an important element in
both business investment decisions and household spending on consumer durables and housing.
The Bank continues to monitor the situation carefully and to appraise the overall
effect  of  these  positive  and  negative  influences  on  our  economy.  It  is  clear,  however,  that
economic growth in 1998 will not be as robust as appeared likely last fall. And some Canadian
regions  and  industries,  particularly  those  with  heavier  reliance  on  primary  commodities  and
exports to Asia, will no doubt feel the impact more than others. As well, there are the economic
effects of the recent ice storm in Eastern Ontario, Quebec, and the Maritimes to consider. But I
want  to  stress  that,  for  the  economy  as  a  whole,  the  outlook  is  still  favourable  for  continued
expansion  in  output  and  employment,  and  for  a  further  gradual  reduction  in  the  margin  of
unused capacity.
Recent developments in international financial markets
Next,  I  would  like  to  say  a  few  words  about  recent  developments  in  world
financial markets. The key feature of these developments has been the sharp appreciation of the
US dollar. Measured against all major currencies, the value of the US dollar has risen by about 4
per cent since late September. Two main factors have combined to push the US dollar up. The
first is the remarkable strength of the US economy relative to the economies of its major trading
partners.  Indeed,  the  US  economy  has  been  expanding  more  rapidly  and  operating  at  higher
levels  of  capacity  than  were  thought  to  be  sustainable  in  the  past.  The  second  factor  is  the
attraction that the large, efficient, and liquid US financial markets hold for nervous investors in
search of a safe haven because of the events in Asia.
The  dampening  effect  of  the  Asian  problems  on  expectations  for  primary
commodity prices has also been a factor behind movements in the currencies of countries,  like
Canada, that are important producers and exporters of such products.
With all this going on, the Canadian dollar has declined by just under 5 per cent
against  the  US  dollar  since  late  September.  Because  other  major  currencies  have  also  fallen
against  the  US  dollar  during  this  period,  the  Canadian  dollar  has  declined  much  less  against
these  currencies.  Nonetheless,  given  the  importance  of  our  trade  with  the  United  States,  the
effective value of the Canadian dollar, measured on a trade-weighted basis against all the major
G-10 currencies, has declined significantly in recent months.
This  decline  in  the  value  of  our  currency  led  to  a  further  substantial  easing  of
monetary conditions. But, as I said before, even with the effects of the Asian crisis, the Canadian
economy is on track to continue expanding and moving towards full use of its potential. In these
circumstances, the extent of the recent further monetary easing was not appropriate. That is why
BIS Review   7/1998
- 4 -
we moved last week to re-balance monetary conditions, and to provide support for the Canadian
dollar, by raising the Bank Rate by ½ of a percentage point to 5 per cent.
It  is  probably  too  early  to  be  drawing  conclusions  and  lessons  from  this  latest
episode  of  world  financial  turbulence.  Still,  when  it  comes  to  Canada,  it  is  worth  noting  the
different reaction in domestic financial markets this time compared with our experience during
the Mexican currency crisis of early 1995. Back then, the international financial turmoil had the
effect  of  focusing  market  attention  on  Canada’s  fiscal  problems,  causing  investors  to  demand
higher risk premiums. And this led to sharply higher longer-term rates in Canada. This time, as I
mentioned,  domestic  longer-term  rates  have  been  falling,  along  with  comparable  rates  in  the
United States and Europe, to their lowest levels in 30 years.
What this tells me is that  it  pays  to  have  one’s  house  in  order.  Now  we  can  see
more clearly the importance of the remarkable progress that has been made since 1995 in fiscal
deficit reduction. A declining ratio of public debt relative to the size of our economy will help to
further reduce our vulnerability to international shocks.
From a monetary policy perspective, the best contribution your central  bank  can
make to helping the economy cope with external shocks is to ensure that inflation remains under
control. Nothing is as important to investors, especially during turbulent times, as the assurance
that comes from the protection that low and stable inflation provides for the value of money.
Concluding remarks
In closing, let me reiterate that, in view of the uncertainties involved, it is difficult
at this time to make precise assessments of the likely effects of the Asian crisis on the Canadian
economy.  But  in  making  judgments  about  our  economy,  we  must  also  consider  the  positive
influences  of  the  economic  momentum  in  many  of  our  major  trading  partners,  as  well  as  the
prospects for domestic demand in Canada.
The main factors at play in the outlook for domestic demand suggest that business
and  household  spending  should  continue  to  grow.  In  particular,  monetary  conditions  are  very
stimulative, providing considerable encouragement for expansion.
All in all, the economic outlook remains positive. And with our low inflation rate
and greatly improved fiscal position, the Canadian economy is now in better shape to withstand
the impact of the Asian crisis and to continue to make headway in improving the well-being of
Canadians.
BIS Review   7/1998
