Mr. Patrikis discusses the implications of the Year 2000 computer problem for
international banking and finance   Statement by the First Vice-President of the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York, Mr. Ernest T. Patrikis, before the Committee on Banking and Financial Services
of the US House of Representatives on 23/6/98.
I am pleased to appear before the Committee today to discuss the implications of the
Year 2000 computer problem for international banking and finance. I am appearing in my capacity
as Chairman of the Joint Year 2000 Council, which is sponsored jointly by the Basle Committee on
Banking  Supervision,  the  G-10  central  bank  governors’  Committee  on  Payment  and  Settlement
Systems, the International Association of Insurance Supervisors, and the International Organization
of Securities Commissions (collectively referred to as the “Sponsoring Organizations”).
The international financial community has much work to do to prepare itself for the
challenges  posed  by  the  Year  2000  (“Y2K”)  problem.  While  much  good  work  is  being  done  and
progress  in  many  areas  is  evident,  more  needs  doing.  The  Sponsoring  Organizations  believe  that
mutual  cooperation  and  information  sharing  can  play  a  key  role  in  helping  individual  market
participants carry out these preparations and limit the scope of Y2K-related disruptions. Our major
concern,  of  course,  will  be  the  possible  impact  of  the  Y2K  problem  on  the  functioning  of  the
international financial system as a whole.
Federal  Reserve  Governor  Edward  W.  Kelley,  Jr.  has  recently  elaborated  on  the
activities of the Federal Reserve System in connection with the Y2K problem, as well on possible
macroeconomic  implications.1  I  will  not  attempt  to  cover  those  topics  again  here.  Instead,  this
morning  I  will  begin  with  some  background  on  the  possible  implications  of  the  Y2K  problem  for
international banking and finance. Second, I will describe how various supervisory initiatives led to
the formation of the Joint Year 2000 Council a little more than two months ago. Third, I will discuss
the  actions  being  taken  by  the  Joint  Year  2000  Council,  particularly  in  the  areas  of  raising
awareness, improving preparedness, and contingency planning.
Background on the International Implications of the Y2K Problem
The  Y2K  bug  potentially  affects  all  organizations  that  are  dependent  on  computer
software  applications  or  on  embedded  computer  chips.  In  other  words,  nearly  all  financial
organizations  worldwide  are  potentially  at  risk.  Even  those  whose  own  operations  remain  strictly
paper-based  are  likely  to  be  dependent  on  power,  water,  and  telecommunications  utilities,  which
must  themselves  address  possible  Y2K  problems.  Also,  many  non-financial  customers  have
dependencies on technology.
All  countries  of  the  world,  therefore,  need  to  address  the  Y2K  problem  and  its
potential effects on their domestic financial markets. In some cases, it is said that computer systems
in particular countries are not much affected because their national calendars are not based on the
conventional Gregorian calendar used in the United States and many other countries. I do not derive
much  comfort  from  these  statements  because  in  most  cases  operating  systems  and  the  software
applications  running  on  them  count  internally  with  a  conventional  date  system  that  may  not  be
Y2K-compliant. These systems typically also need to connect and interact with other  systems  that
use conventional dates, so these interfaces must be tested for Y2K-compliance. More broadly, mere
assertions that computer applications are unaffected cannot be seen as a substitute for the rigorous
                                                     
1 
See  Testimony  of  Governor  Edward  W.  Kelley,  Jr.  Before  the  Committee  on  Commerce,  Science,  and
Transportation, U.S. Senate.  April 28, 1998.
BIS Review   56/1998
- 2 -
assessment,  remediation,  and  testing  efforts  that  should  be  undertaken  by  financial  market
participants worldwide.
The  increasing  extent  of  cross-border,  financial-market  activity  has  been  much
remarked on in recent years. Perhaps less well known is the fact that this activity is dependent on a
large, geographically diverse, and highly computer-intensive global infrastructure for each of the key
phases of this activity -- from trade execution through to payment and settlement.
As  an  example,  consider  the  daily  financial  market  activities  of  a  hypothetical
US-based mutual fund holding stocks and bonds in a number of foreign jurisdictions. Such a mutual
fund would likely execute trades via relationships with a set of securities dealers, who themselves
might  make  use  of  other  securities  brokers  and  dealers,  including  some  outside  the  United  States.
The operational integrity of the major securities dealers in each national securities market is critical
to the smooth functioning of those markets. In addition, securities trading in most countries is reliant
on  the  proper  functioning  of  the  respective  exchanges,  brokerage  networks,  or  electronic  trading
systems  and  the  national  telecommunications  infrastructure  on  which  these  all  depend.  Financial
markets today are also highly dependent on the availability of real-time price and trade quotations
provided by financial information services.
For  record-keeping,  administration,  and  trade  settlement  purposes,  our  hypothetical
mutual fund would also likely maintain a relationship with one or more global custodians (banks or
brokerage  firms),  who  themselves  would  typically  maintain  relationships  with  a  network  of
sub-custodians located in various domestic markets around the world. Actual settlement of securities
transactions  typically  occurs  over  the  books  of  a  domestic  securities  depository,  such  as  the
Depository  Trust  Company  (“DTC”)  or  the  Fedwire  National  Book-Entry  System  in  the  United
States,  or  at  one  of  the  two  major  international  securities  depositories,  Euroclear  and  Cedel.
Additional clearing firms, such as the National Securities Clearing Corporation (“NSCC”) and  the
Government  Securities  Clearing  Corporation  (“GSCC”)  in  the  United  States,  may  also  occupy
central roles in the trade clearance and settlement process.
Payments  and  foreign  exchange  transactions  on  behalf  of  the  mutual  fund  would
involve  the  use  of  correspondent  banks,  both  for  the  US  dollar  and  for  other  relevant  currencies.
These  transactions  would  typically  settle  over  the  books  of  domestic  wholesale  payment  systems,
such as the Clearing House Interbank Payments System (“CHIPS”) or Fedwire in the United States,
and the new TARGET system for the euro. Correspondent banks are also heavily dependent on the
use  of  cross-border  payments  messaging  through  the  network  maintained  by  the  Society  for
Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommunications (“S.W.I.F.T.”) to advise and confirm payments.
To  provide  some  sense  of  the  magnitudes  involved  here,  consider  that  the  Fedwire  and  CHIPS
systems  process  a  combined  $3  trillion  in  funds  transfers  on  an  average  day  (split  roughly  evenly
between  the  two  systems).  While  S.W.I.F.T.  itself  does  not  transfer  funds,  its  messaging  network
carries over three million messages per day relating to financial transactions worldwide.
The  many  interconnections  of  the  global  financial  market  infrastructure  imply  that
financial  market  participants  in  the  United  States  could  be  affected  by  Y2K-related  disruptions  in
other financial markets. In assessing the scope of any such potential problems, we should be realistic
in  accepting  that  some  disruptions  are  inevitable,  while  also  recognizing  that  not  all  countries
confront Y2K problems of similar magnitudes. The problem simply affects too many organizations
and too many systems to expect that 100 percent readiness will be achieved throughout the world.
Nor are the best efforts of supervisors and regulators capable of completely eradicating the risk of
disruption. Ultimately, the work of fixing the Y2K problem rests with firms  themselves,  and  even
some of the most determined and well-funded Year 2000 efforts may miss something.
Global Year 2000 Round Table
BIS Review   56/1998
- 3 -
Recognizing  the  global  nature  of  the  issues  surrounding  the  Y2K  problem,  each  of
the Sponsoring Organizations undertook initiatives in 1997 to raise awareness, enhance disclosure,
and  prompt  appropriate  action  within  the  financial  industry.  Their  decision  last  fall  to  organize  a
Global  Year  2000  Round  Table  was  motivated  by  a  growing  sense  of  the  seriousness  of  the  Y2K
challenges posed in many countries and of the potentially severe consequences for financial markets
that  fail  to  meet  these  challenges.  The  Global  Year  2000  Round  Table  was  held  at  the  Bank  for
International Settlements on April 8, 1998. It was attended by more than 200 senior executives from
52 countries, representing a variety of private and public organizations in the financial, information
technology, telecommunications, and business communities around the world.2
The  discussions  at  the  Round  Table  confirmed  that  the  Y2K  issue  must  be  a  top
priority for directors and senior management, and that the public and private sectors should increase
efforts  to  share  information.  The  importance  of  thorough  testing,  both  internally  and  with
counterparties,  was  emphasized  as  the  most  effective  way  to  ensure  that  Y2K  problems  are
minimized. Round Table participants identified the need to continue the widening and strengthening
of external testing programs in many countries.
The  communiqué  issued  by  the  four  Sponsoring  Organizations  at  the  close  of  the
Round  Table  recommended  that  market  participants  from  regions  that  have  not  yet  vigorously
tackled the problem should consider  the  need  to  invest  significant  resources  in  the  short  time  that
remains.  The  Sponsoring  Organizations  further  recommended  that  external  testing  programs  be
developed  and  expanded  and  that  all  financial  market  supervisors  worldwide  should  implement
programs that enable them to assess the Y2K readiness of the firms and market infrastructures that
they supervise. The Sponsoring Organizations urged telecommunications and electricity providers to
share  information  on  the  state  of  their  own  preparations  and  encouraged  market  participants  and
supervisors and regulators to consider the need to develop appropriate contingency procedures.
At  the  Round  Table,  a  new  private-sector  initiative  known  as  the  Global  2000
Coordinating Group was announced. The aims of the Global 2000 effort are to identify and support
coordinated initiatives by the global financial community to improve the Y2K readiness of financial
markets  worldwide.  For  example,  current  Global  2000  projects  include  the  development  of
recommendations for financial infrastructure testing and guidelines for addressing Y2K compliance
issues  related  to  vendors  and  service  providers.  The  Global  2000  Coordinating  Group,  which
includes representatives from over 75 financial institutions in 18 countries, represents an extremely
valuable private-sector attempt at cooperation on this important issue. At the same time, however,
the international financial supervisory community recognized that it would be useful to establish a
public-sector group, called the Joint Year 2000 Council, that would work with the private sector and
also maintain a high level of attention on the Y2K problem among financial market supervisors and
regulators worldwide.
                                                     
2 
A videotape containing highlights of the Global Year 2000 Round Table is available free of charge from the
Bank  for  International  Settlements.  Please  contact  the  Joint  Year  2000  Council  Secretariat  at  the  Bank  for
International Settlements, Centralbahnplatz 2, CH-4002 Basle, Switzerland.  (telephone: 41 61 2808432, fax:
41 61 280 9100, email: jy2kcouncil.bis.org)  The Federal Financial Institutions Examinations  Council  ("FFIEC")
has  also  placed  the  entirety  of  this  videotape  on  its  web  site, where it is available for downloading in
whole or in part. Please see http://www.bog.frb.fed.us/y2k/video_index.htm#19980408
BIS Review   56/1998
Joint Year 2000 Council
- 4 -
The  formation  of  the  Joint  Year  2000  Council  was  announced  at  the  end  of  the
Global Year 2000 Round Table on April 8, 1998. The  Joint  Year  2000  Council  consists  of  senior
members  of  the  four  Sponsoring  Organizations.  Every  continent  is  represented  by  at  least  one
member  on  the  Council.  The  Secretariat  of  the  Council  is  provided  by  the  Bank  for  International
Settlements. I am honored to serve as the Chairman of the Joint Year 2000 Council.
The  mission  of  the  Joint  Year  2000  Council  has  four  parts:  First,  to  ensure  a  high
level  of  attention  on  the  Y2K  computer  challenge  within  the  global  financial  supervisory
community; second, to share information on regulatory and supervisory strategies and approaches;
third,  to  discuss  possible  contingency  measures;  and  fourth,  to  serve  as  a  point  of  contact  with
national and international private-sector initiatives. After their meetings on May 8-9, 1998, the G-7
finance ministers called on the Joint Year 2000 Council and its Sponsoring Organizations to monitor
the Y2K-related work in the financial industry worldwide and to take all possible steps to encourage
readiness.
The  Council  has  met  twice  since  being  formed  in  early  April  and  plans  to  meet
frequently, almost monthly, between now and January, 2000. At our first meeting, we organized our
work projects and approved our mission statement. At our second meeting, we met for the first time
with an External Consultative Committee consisting of international public-sector and private-sector
organizations. Meeting with this External Consultative Committee is intended to enhance the degree
of information sharing and the raising of awareness on different aspects of the Year 2000 problem by
both public and private sectors within the global financial markets.
The  External  Consultative  Committee  includes  representatives  from  international
payment  and  settlement  mechanisms  (such  as  S.W.I.F.T.,  Euroclear,  Cedel,  and  VISA),  from
international  financial  market  associations  (such  as  the  International  Swaps  and  Derivatives
Association, the International Institute of Finance, and the Global 2000 Coordinating Group), from
multilateral  organizations  (such  as  the  IMF,  OECD,  and  World  Bank),  from  the  financial  rating
agencies  (such  as  Moody’s  and  Standard  &  Poor’s),  and  from  a  number  of  other  international
organizations  (such  as  the  International  Telecommunications  Union,  Reuters,  the  International
Federation  of  Accountants,  and  the  International  Chamber  of  Commerce).  This  diversity  of
perspectives  led  to  an  extremely  valuable  discussion  with  the  Joint  Year  2000  Council  and
stimulated work on several projects to be taken forward with input from both the public and private
sectors, for example, the initiatives on Y2K testing and self-assessment that I will describe shortly.
Further sessions with the External Consultative Committee are planned on a quarterly basis.
It is important at the outset for me to be clear that the Joint Year 2000 Council is not
intended  to  become  a  global  Y2K  regulatory  authority,  with  sweeping  powers  to  coordinate
international  action  or  to  take  responsibility  for  ensuring  Y2K  readiness  in  every  financial  market
worldwide. Through our ability to serve as a clearinghouse for Y2K information, however, I believe
that  the  Joint  Year  2000  Council  will  play  a  positive  role  in  three  areas:  (1)  raising  awareness,
(2) improving  preparedness,  and  (3)  contingency  planning.  In  the  next  portion  of  my  remarks,  I
would like to address each of these roles in turn.
Efforts to Promote Awareness
The  Joint  Year  2000  Council  is  undertaking  a  series  of  initiatives  that  may  be
described under the heading of promoting awareness. By this term, I  do  not  mean  to  include  only
those initiatives aimed at raising general awareness, although that too is still needed in some cases. I
mean  to  include  efforts  to  promote  better  awareness  of  the  many  efforts  currently  under  way  to
BIS Review   56/1998
- 5 -
tackle the Y2K problem. I have found that, while many organizations are working hard on various
aspects of the Y2K challenge, in many cases these efforts would be enhanced by a greater degree of
information sharing with others. For example, at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, we have
been  holding  quarterly  Y2K  forums  with  a  diverse  set  of  financial  organizations  in  the  area.
Participants  have  requested  that  we  continue  to  hold  these  meetings  --  in  fact,  to  hold  them  even
more  frequently  --  because  they  believe  that  the  contacts  and  the  exchange  of  views  are  broadly
beneficial. We hope to use the Joint Year 2000 Council to achieve similar goals.
Each of the members of the Joint Year 2000 Council has committed to help play a
leading role in promoting awareness of Y2K initiatives within their region. Each of us will help in
coordinating regional Y2K forums or conferences and will publicly promote the goals of the Joint
Year 2000 Council in speeches and on conference programs.
The Joint Year 2000 Council will also maintain extensive world-wide-web pages that
can be accessed freely over the Internet.3 These pages are being maintained through the support the
Council  has  received  from  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  in  particular  from  the  General
Manager, Andrew Crockett. These web pages will maintain current information on the activities of
the Joint Year 2000 Council.
  The  most  extensive  aspect  of  the  Council’s  web  site  will  be  a  series  of  country
pages, one for each country in the world. For each country, the page will contain contact information
for  government  entities  (including  national  coordinators),  financial  industry  supervisors  and
regulators  (including  central  banks,  banking  supervisors,  insurance  supervisors,  and  securities
regulators),  financial  industry  associations,  payment,  settlement  and  trading  systems,  chambers  of
commerce,  and  major  utility  associations  or  supervisors.  For  each  of  these  organizations,  a  name,
address,  phone  number,  fax  number,  electronic  mail  and  web  site  address  will  be  provided.  Other
relevant  information  on  an  organization’s  Y2K  preparations  may  also  be  included,  for  example,
whether  it  has  a  dedicated  Y2K  contact  or  has  taken  specific  action  with  respect  to  the  Y2K
problem.
The  motivation  for  developing  these  country  pages  is  to  increase  awareness  of  the
work that is being done to address the Y2K problem and to enable market participants to easily find
out more information about the state of preparations worldwide. Establishing these national contacts
will also help to develop the informal networks and arrangements that may be needed in addressing
other Y2K-related issues, for example, in formulating contingency measures. Finally, of course, the
presence of the country pages may exert pressure on those countries where more vigorous action is
needed. A blank or uninformative country listing would probably not be seen as a good sign by some
financial market participants.
In  addition,  the  web  pages  of  the  Joint  Year  2000  Council  will  also  provide
summaries  of  the  efforts  being  undertaken  by  its  Sponsoring  Organizations  as  well  as  links  to  the
relevant  web  sites.  For  example,  reports  on  Y2K  surveys  of  supervisors  and  regulators  being
undertaken by the Basle Committee on Banking Supervision and by the International Organization
of Securities Commissions are planned  to  be  made  available  on  the  Joint  Year  2000  Council  web
site. Public papers produced by the Joint Year 2000 Council will also be available on the web site. A
listing  of  international  conferences  and  seminars  related  to  Y2K  will  be  posted  on  the  web  site,
together with links to other Y2K web sites and documents.
At  this  stage,  each  member  of  the  Joint  Year  2000  Council  is  in  the  process  of
finalizing the country page for its respective country. Last week, I wrote to every contact provided by
                                                     
3 
The web pages of the Joint Year 2000 Council can be reached at the web site of the Bank for International
Settlements (www.bis.org).  These pages will also be registered under the name jy2kcouncil.org in the near
future.
BIS Review   56/1998
- 6 -
the four Sponsoring Organizations (almost 600 contacts in over 170 countries), asking for assistance
in coordinating the development of their country page. This also provided a further opportunity to
raise  the  awareness  of  the  Year  2000  problem  at  the  most  senior  levels  of  financial  market
authorities and supervisors in countries around the world. Through the effort to develop this web site
and other similar efforts by the Joint Year 2000 Council, I believe we can succeed  at  keeping  the
awareness of the issue at a very high level within the global financial supervisory community.
Efforts to Improve Preparedness
Of course, awareness of the Year 2000 problem is only the first step in addressing it.
Global  efforts  to  prepare  for  Year  2000  vary  widely,  and  many  countries  believe  that  more
coordinated national action will be necessary to tackle the problem as effectively as possible. At our
second  meeting  of  the  Joint  Year  2000  Council,  a  strong  consensus  emerged  that  a  national
government  body  in  each  country  could  play  a  helpful  role  in  coordinating  preparations  for  Y2K.
While the Council did not have a strong view on what particular form or what specific authority such
a body would require in each specific country, the Council members felt strongly that involvement in
some fashion by the national government could be beneficial.
Accordingly, the Joint Year 2000 Council plans to issue a statement in the near future
providing  general  support  for  the  concept  of  a  national-level  coordinating  body  for  the  Y2K
problem. In the United States, of course, the White House has established the President’s Council on
Year  2000  Conversion,  headed  by  John  Koskinen.  This  effort,  as  well  as  those  of  this  committee
under  the  leadership  of  Chairman  Leach,  and  of  the  other  Congressional  committees  that  have
addressed the Y2K problem, has shown that national government bodies have a very important and
useful role to play in encouraging progress in addressing the Y2K problem.
Turning  now  to  the  question  of  how  financial  supervisors  can  implement  effective
Y2K  programs,  the  Joint  Year  2000  Council  intends  to  promote  the  sharing  of  strategies  and
approaches.  For  example,  the  Basle  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  has  prepared  a  paper
containing  “Supervisory  Guidance  on  Independent  Assessment  of  Bank  Year  2000  Preparations”.
This  document  is  aimed  at  moving  supervisors  worldwide  from  a  level  of  general  awareness  to  a
specific,  concrete  program  of  action  for  overseeing  Y2K  preparations,  both  on  an  individual  bank
basis and on a system-wide basis.
The Joint Year 2000 Council intends to adapt this paper for use by financial market
regulators and supervisors more broadly and to issue it as rapidly as possible with the endorsement
of  all  four  Sponsoring  Organizations.  The  goal  will  be  to  provide  guidance  in  developing  specific
Year  2000  action  plans  for  all  types  of  financial  market  authorities.  Supervisors  in  countries  that
have gotten a head start on the issue can thereby provide the benefit of their experience to those who
are starting later.  Those supervisors getting a late start have a need for tools of this type.
The Joint Year 2000 Council will also be working with the members of our External
Consultative  Committee,  particularly  the  Global  2000  Coordinating  Group,  to  build  on  this  effort
and  develop  a  Y2K  self-assessment  tool  that  could  be  used  broadly  by  the  financial  industry  in
countries around the world. We also intend to develop additional papers on a variety of Y2K topics
that might be of interest to the global financial supervisory community.
At this point, I am sure that members of the Committee have questions regarding the
state of Y2K preparations in various parts of the world. I think that it is fair to say that most believe a
spectrum  exists,  with  the  United  States  at  one  end  of  the  spectrum,  and  emerging  market  and
undeveloped  countries  at  the  other  end.  There  are  likely  exceptions  of  course;  some  developed
BIS Review   56/1998
- 7 -
countries are probably less far along than they should be. Some emerging market countries, on the
other hand, appear to be quite advanced in their preparations.
Overall, however, there is still not nearly enough concrete, comparable information
on the preparations of individual institutions to be able to make any confident statements about the
state of global preparations in any detail. Over the time remaining until January 2000, we hope to use
the  Joint  Year  2000  Council  as  a  means  of  gathering  a  better  picture  of  the  state  of  global
preparations, and to help direct resources and attention to those regions that appear to be faltering in
their  efforts.  We  will  use  the  information  provided  for  our  web  site  and  the  discussions  with
members  of  our  External  Consultative  Committee  as  our  primary  resources  in  seeking  to  identify
“hot spots” where more urgent efforts are needed.
If  we  identify  regions  where  more  needs  to  be  done,  our  first  step  will  be  to  work
through the relevant national financial supervisors and regulators to increase the urgency of efforts in
their  jurisdiction.  We  may  also  involve  multilateral  institutions,  such  as  the  World  Bank,  to  help
increase national attention on the issue. I do not believe that calling public attention to problems in
specific countries would be a constructive step for us to take at this stage as we are  still  trying  to
build cooperation and our current information is incomplete. In this context, I would also point out
that the market itself will begin to bring strong pressures to bear on specific firms and markets that
exhibit signs of being ill-prepared during the course of 1999.
In  conjunction  with  preparations  for  Y2K,  the  recent  discussion  of  the  Joint  Year
2000  Council  with  the  External  Consultative  Committee  raised  several  important  issues.  First,  in
every national market there is the question of the dependence of the banking and financial sectors on
core infrastructure such as telecommunications, power, water, sewer, and transportation. In all cases,
it  seems  that  it  is  not  an  everyday  occurrence  for  representatives  of  these  differing  sectors  to  get
together  with  financial  sector  representatives  and  discuss  their  mutual  concerns.  Yet,  this  must  be
made  a  priority  if  financial  firms  and  their  counterparties  are  to  achieve  comfort  that  their  own
efforts  to  prepare  for  Year  2000  will  not  be  compromised  by  the  failures  of  systems  beyond  their
control.
A representative of the International Telecommunications Union is a member of our
External  Consultative  Committee.  At  our  meeting  earlier  this  month,  he  provided  useful  factual
information on the preparations being undertaken by telecommunications firms and indicated that a
further  global  survey  and  report  on  this  topic  is  due  to  be  completed  soon.  This  is  the  type  of
information sharing that helps all parties understand the scope of the problem, as well as the efforts
that  others  are  undertaking.  We  intend  to  encourage  further  information  sharing  between  the
financial sector and core infrastructure providers at future meetings of the Joint Year 2000 Council
and the External Consultative Committee. I would also strongly encourage such mutual cooperation
on Y2K preparations within each national jurisdiction.
Another issue that some participants in our Joint Year 2000 Council  are  concerned
about in regard to preparations  in  their  countries  relates  to  the  availability  of  human  resources.  In
some regions, the supply of available information technology professionals may be hard-pressed to
meet the challenges posed by Y2K. For each organization facing resource constraints, this situation
clearly indicates the need to develop action plans for Y2K that set clear priorities among systems and
projects.
More  broadly,  we  must  also  recognize  that  the  lack  of  available  programming
resources will be a significant overall constraint on the scale of Y2K remediation efforts globally. As
a result, the cost of hiring computer professionals capable of addressing the problem will continue to
rise. Wealthy countries are undoubtedly in a better position to bear these increasing costs than are
poor countries.
BIS Review   56/1998
- 8 -
A number of participants from our External Consultative Committee cited the recent
grant  of  £10  million  sterling  by  the  British  Government  to  the  World  Bank  as  a  positive
development. Among other projects, the World Bank intends to use this grant to fund a variety of
educational  and  awareness-raising  events  related  to  Y2K  over  the  next  several  months.  Given  the
potential consequences of a failure to prepare for Y2K, the World Bank indicated to the Joint Year
2000 Council that it intends to take on an aggressive role in promoting and assisting Y2K efforts in
countries  around  the  world.  The  Joint  Year  2000  Council  intends  to  work  closely  with  the  World
Bank to enhance our mutual efforts on the Y2K problem.
The  subject  of  appropriate  Y2K  disclosure  was  also  discussed  by  members  of  the
External  Consultative  Committee.  Many  of  those  present  agreed  that  greater  disclosures  would  be
helpful. However, there was skepticism that a standardized disclosure format would be effective in
eliciting meaningful information for a wide class of financial firms, given the complexity and variety
of Y2K issues facing these firms worldwide. It was also noted that disclosure which relies primarily
on a firm’s own subjective assessments of its Y2K problems inevitably will suffer from an optimistic
bias.
In addition, most Y2K efforts will not reach the serious testing phase until 1999. The
purpose of the testing will be to uncover areas where  additional  work  is  required,  so  that  the  first
round of  tests  can  be  expected  to  encounter  problems.  In  this  environment,  it  may  be  difficult  for
firms themselves to assess the true state of their Y2K preparations. Also, firms who believe they are
going  to  be  ready  will  be  directed  by  legal  counsel  not  to  make  too  strong  a  statement  to  avoid
liability claims in case of unforeseen problems. On the other hand, firms that do not believe they can
get ready in time will seek to avoid stating this clearly to protect their activities during 1999. For all
of these reasons, I am doubtful that specific, reliable information on the state of Y2K preparations by
individual firms worldwide will become publicly available.
Finally, in the area of improving preparedness, I have saved the most important topic
for last -- namely, testing. Testing programs, particularly external testing programs, are universally
regarded as the most critical element of serious Y2K preparations in the financial sector. The Joint
Year 2000 Council encourages all firms and institutions active in the financial markets to engage in
internal and external testing of their important applications and interfaces. To this end, many major
payment  and  settlement  systems  around  the  world  have  developed  extensive  testing  programs  and
procedures for their participants. In the United States, for example, Fedwire, CHIPS, and S.W.I.F.T.
have  coordinated  shared  testing  days  for  the  purpose  of  testing  the  major  international  wholesale
payments infrastructure for the US dollar. The Securities Industry Association (“SIA”) has been at
the forefront of an ambitious program to develop a coordinated industry-wide test of all aspects of
the trading and settlement infrastructure for the US stock market. The FFIEC’s efforts have also been
extremely beneficial in stressing the importance of testing within the banking sector generally.
Yet,  external  testing  programs  globally  need  to  be  dramatically  extended  and
expanded. To that end, the G-10 Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems last year started to
collect  information  on  the  state  of  preparedness  and  testing  of  payment  and  settlement  systems
worldwide. To date, over 150 systems in 47 countries have responded to the framework and posted
such  plans.4  The  Joint  Year  2000  Council  intends  to  expand  the  coverage  of  this  framework  to
exchanges and trading systems, as well as major financial information services providers, and hopes
to expand the number of countries and systems that are included. We will also collate and present the
information graphically to help highlight anomalies in testing schedules, and to facilitate the efforts
of systems to coordinate test scheduling where feasible.
                                                     
4 
The relevant information can now be found on the pages of the Joint Year 2000 Council.
BIS Review   56/1998
- 9 -
Primarily,  I  see  this  as  an  exercise  in  peer  pressure.  If  we  list  every  country  in  the
world on our web site and the public can see that some countries have scheduled mandatory external
tests  of  their  major  trading  and  settlement  systems,  while  other  countries  do  not  provide  any
information,  that  second  country  may  come  under  greater  pressure  to  organize  an  external  testing
program. This is our stated goal. We will simply have blanks for those countries that do not respond
to our requests for information.
Of  course,  if  the  Joint  Year  2000  Council  is  going  to  encourage  testing  to  such  an
extent, then it is only appropriate that we also help provide some tools for those countries trying to
get a serious testing effort underway in a short amount of time. This is another of our high-priority
projects.  We  will  be  working  with  members  of  the  External  Consultative  Committee  --  including
representatives of the Global 2000 Coordinating Group, S.W.I.F.T., and the World Bank -- to rapidly
develop  a  series  of  documents  that  help  countries  set  up  testing  programs  and  overcome  common
obstacles.  We  intend  to  issue  these  documents  broadly  by  the  end  of  the  summer,  and  some  parts
well before that.
In closing this section of my statement, I do not think it is possible to over-emphasize
the importance of testing to help improve readiness. To illustrate this point, I would like to draw on
our experiences with Fedwire, the Federal Reserve’s wholesale interbank payments system. Much of
the current Fedwire software application was written in the last five years, with the Y2K problem in
mind. Nevertheless, some of the older software code that was carried over into the new application
was not Y2K-compliant. Without the rigorous internal Y2K testing program that the Federal Reserve
adopted,  our  Y2K  remediation  efforts  might,  therefore,  have  been  incomplete.  I  think  of  this
experience whenever I hear it said that some countries are immune to Y2K because they have only
recently introduced information  technology  and  that  recent  software  programs  are  less  affected  by
Y2K. I ask whether those programs have truly been thoroughly tested for Y2K compliance.
Contingency Planning Efforts
The  third  major  role  of  the  Joint  Year  2000  Council  will  relate  to  contingency
planning. In this context, I should note that contingency planning is something that most financial
market authorities, particularly central  banks,  undertake  regularly  with  regard  to  a  wide  variety  of
potential  market  disruptions.  Most  private-sector  financial  firms,  as  well,  have  well  developed
contingency and business continuity plans in place for their operations.
Nevertheless, it is clear that contingency planning for Y2K problems has a number of
unique characteristics. First, of course, is the fact that one cannot rely on a backup computer site for
Y2K contingency if that site also uses the same software that is the cause of the Y2K problem at the
main site. In some cases, it is impractical to build a duplicate software system from scratch simply to
provide for Y2K contingency. In these cases, as a senior banker explained at one of our New York
Y2K forums, contingency planning amounts to, “Testing, testing, and more testing.”
Contingency  planning  can  also  be  separated  into  components  that  are  firm-specific
and those that are market-wide. Each individual firm will need to develop its own contingency plans
designed  to  maintain  the  integrity  of  its  operations  during  the  changeover  to  the  Year  2000.  The
FFIEC  has  recently  issued  guidance  to  banks  in  the  United  States  regarding  the  core  elements  of
their own contingency planning.5 The Joint Year 2000 Council will also be developing a paper on
contingency planning for the benefit of the global financial supervisory community. This paper will
seek to address firm-level contingency as well as issues of market-wide contingency.
                                                     
5 
See www.ffiec.gov/y2k/contplan.htm
BIS Review   56/1998
- 10 -
Market-wide contingency refers to the planning by participants and supervisors done
to ensure that individual disruptions can be managed in ways that will prevent them from causing
disruptions to critical market infrastructures. For instance, we at the Federal Reserve have gone to
great lengths to ensure that barriers are in place to prevent Y2K problems with a Fedwire participant
from causing problems on the Fedwire system itself. We are also now actively researching additional
steps  that  the  Federal  Reserve  could  take  to  better  prepare  the  financial  markets  as  a  whole  to
function in spite of disruptions at individual firms.
It  is  also  important  to  realize  that  contingency  planning  for  Y2K  is  not  solely  an
operational  issue.  Financial  firms  may  seek  to  adopt  a  defensive  posture  in  the  marketplace  well
ahead of Monday, January 3, 2000 (the first business day of the new year in the United States). For
example,  market  participants  may  seek  to  minimize  the  number  of  transactions  that  would  be
scheduled  for  settlement  on  January  3  or  January  4,  or  that  would  require  open  positions  to  be
maintained over the century date change weekend.
Contingency planning involves a series of elements, many of which must  be  put  in
place well before January 2000. For example, we must consider many possible sources of disruption
and determine what approaches could be available to limit the impact of each possible disruption.
The  sooner  such  thinking  occurs,  the  more  opportunity  we  have  to  plan  around  the  possible
disruptions. In this context, members of our External Consultative Committee noted that one of the
key  obstacles  to  effective  contingency  planning  is  the  inability  to  list  and  consider  all  possible
disruption scenarios. Several of these participants noted that their firms were engaging consultants or
other procedures to expand the number of scenarios for inclusion in their Y2K contingency planning.
In New York, we will be using our  Y2K  forum  next  month  to  discuss  contingency
planning  with  a  diverse  set  of  market  participants.  These  local  market  participants  will  provide
helpful  insights  for  the  Joint  Year  2000  Council.  Clearly,  more  work  is  needed  on  contingency
planning for Y2K, especially at the international level. Once we get beyond the early fall of this year,
I  believe  that  these  efforts  will  begin  to  receive  much  greater  focus  and  attention,  and  --  together
with testing -- will dominate our discussions of Y2K during 1999.
Closing Remarks
In  closing,  I  would  like  to  thank  the  Committee  for  the  opportunity  to  appear  and
submit a statement on this important issue. I hope that the efforts of the Joint Year 2000 Council will
help to make a difference in improving the state of Y2K preparations in the international financial
community.  Realistically,  however,  I  believe  that  it  is  important  to  understand  the  limits  of  what
financial  market  supervisors  can  accomplish,  either  individually  or  collectively.  Only  firms
themselves  have  the  ability  to  address  the  Year  2000  problems  that  exist  within  their  own
organizations.  Only  firms  working  together  can  assure  that  local  markets  will  function  normally.
Supervisors and regulators cannot guarantee that disruptions will not occur.
Given the sheer number of organizations that  are  potentially  at  risk,  it  is  inevitable
that Y2K-related disruptions will occur. Today it would be impossible to predict the precise nature
of these disruptions. However, we do know that financial markets have in  the  past  survived  many
other  serious  disruptions,  including  blackouts,  snow  storms,  ice  storms,  and  floods.  We  will  also
have a very interesting case at the end of this year with the changeover to monetary union in Europe.
We will all be watching carefully to see whether the extent of operational problems related to this
event is greater or less than expected.
BIS Review   56/1998
- 11 -
I would also like to say at this point that my discussions with other members of the
Joint Year 2000 Council and with members of the External Consultative Committee have convinced
me that successful efforts to address the Y2K problem will be dependent on the credibility of those
calling  for  action.  Those  of  us  —  such  as  members  of  this  Committee  as  well  as  others  in
Congress — who are seriously engaged and concerned need to be able to persuade others of the need
to  take  appropriate  actions  promptly.  It  would  be  unfortunate  if  general  perceptions  of  the  Y2K
problem are driven primarily by unofficial commentators whose rhetoric is seen to exceed the facts
on which it is based, and therefore easily dismissed.
As a central banker and bank supervisor, my major concern must be with the system
as a whole. At this point, I believe that we are doing everything possible to limit the possibility that
Y2K disruptions will have systemic consequences in our markets. However, we must all continue to
work hard -- both individually and cooperatively -- in the time that remains to ensure that this threat
does not become more concrete.
In  that  spirit,  Mr.  Chairman,  I  would  like  to  end  my  remarks  by  commending  the
Committee for organizing these hearings on the implications of the Year 2000 computer problem for
international banking and finance.
BIS Review   56/1998
