Mr. Fazio reports on the Bank of Italy and the European System of Central
Banks      Statement  by  the  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Italy,  Dott.  Antonio  Fazio,  before  the
Treasury, Budget and Planning Committee of the Chamber of Deputies, in Rome on 12/2/98.
The results the Italian economy has achieved in the past five years are attributable
to the combined operation of fiscal and monetary policy and to wage moderation.
In  late  1992  and  early  1993  the  restrictive  stance  of  monetary  policy  prevented
expectations of rising prices, fuelled by the decline in the external value of the lira and the abrupt
change  in  the  exchange  rate  regime,  from  translating  into  actual  inflation.  A  substantial
contribution to this result came from low wage growth and budgetary measures that impinged on
the structure of the main components of government spending.
Conditions  in  the  economy  became  difficult  again  during  1994:  the  state  sector
borrowing requirement was overshooting the targets and demand was growing rapidly, with the
result that inflationary pressures developed. In December 1994 and the first few months of 1995
domestic  political  factors  and  the  repercussions  of  the  Mexican  crisis  on  the  foreign  exchange
and financial markets aggravated the situation. Official rates were raised three times: in August
1994,  at  the  first  manifestation  of  price  tensions;  in  February  1995,  in  conjunction  with
supplementary  fiscal  measures;  and  in  May  of  the  same  year,  when  doubts  arose  about  the
curbing of inflation.
The monetary tightening, the fiscal measures of early 1995 and the stabilization of
the exchange rate had a positive influence on inflation expectations and long-term interest rates.
Monetary  policy  maintained  a  restrictive  stance  throughout  1995  and  in  the  first
half of 1996, with the aim of subduing inflation expectations and bringing the rate of increase in
prices into line with that prevailing in the other leading industrial countries.
In  July  1996  a  start  was  made  on  lowering  the  official  rates.  The  reduction  was
prudent and calibrated above all in relation to the decline in expected and actual inflation. This
approach  resulted  in  a  constant  inflow  of  funds  from  abroad  for  purchases  of  government
securities; by offsetting the large outflows of Italian capital generated by the  need  for  portfolio
diversification, these inflows contributed to the stability of the exchange rate of the lira.
The  progress  achieved  made  it  possible  for  the  lira  to  rejoin  the  exchange  rate
mechanism of the EMS in November 1996.
The caution employed in relaxing monetary conditions meant that Italy’s financial
and  foreign  exchange  markets  were  not  affected  more  than  marginally  in  1997  by  the  tensions
that  emerged  at  the  international  level  in  connection  with  the  crisis  in  East  Asia  and  the
vicissitudes of some important European countries or by those attributable to domestic political
developments.
Today the Bank of Italy’s reserves comprise more than 2,500 tonnes of gold and
foreign  assets,  net  of  repurchase  agreements,  worth  82  trillion  lire,  compared  with  ó  trillion  in
1992.  Underlying  the  lira’s  solidity  is  the  return  to  balance  between  Italy’s  external  assets  and
liabilities.
At  the  end  of  1992  Italy  had  external  claims  of  600  trillion  lire  and  external
liabilities amounting to 770 trillion. The net debt of 170 trillion was equal to 11 per cent of GDP.
BIS Review   10/1998
- 2 -
Thanks  to  the  succession  of  surpluses  recorded  on  the  current  account  of  the  balance  of
payments,  at  the  end  of  1997  Italy’s  overall  net  external  position  was  once  more  broadly  in
balance.
Last  September  some  470  trillion  lire  of  government  foreign  debt,  consisting
mostly  of  government  securities  held  by  non-residents,  were  matched  by  net  external  assets  of
more than 350 trillion held by the non-bank private sector, about 100 trillion held by the Bank of
Italy and smaller amounts held by banks and other financial operators.
The Bank of Italy and the European System of Central Banks
It has been agreed within the Community that the decisions concerning the start of
monetary union – in particular, those involving the countries that will adopt the single currency
from the start – will be taken in the early part of the month of May.
With  the  introduction  of  the  single  currency,  the  task  of  formulating  monetary
policy will be transferred to the European System of Central Banks, comprising the central banks
of all the participating countries and the European Central Bank.
The  Treaty  establishing  the  European  Community,  as  amended  at  Maastricht,
provides a broad outline of the internal organization of the ESCB. The preparatory work carried
out  by  the  European  Monetary  Institute  since  the  signing  of  the  Treaty  has  focused  on  these
aspects.
The national central banks will be entrusted with the task of implementing within
each country the monetary policy decided at the Community level.
The central banks of the participating countries will continue to be responsible for
all  the  functions  they  are  entrusted  with  under  national  laws;  in  Italy  these  include  banking
supervision, the supervision of markets, the safeguarding of competition in the credit market and,
jointly with the European Central Bank, oversight of the payments system.
The  systemic  crises  in  foreign  markets  have  strengthened  the  view  that  banking
supervision complements monetary policy in determining conditions of stability in financial and
credit markets.
The  primary  objective  of  the  common  monetary  policy  is  price  stability.  The
mandate, clear and unequivocal, given to the European System of Central Banks is based on two
tenets held by the drafters of the Treaty: that the stability of the value of money is a public good
which  does  not  hinder,  but  rather  fosters,  sustainable  growth  of  the  real  economy;  and  that
maintaining stability depends crucially on the operation of monetary policy.
The  European  System  of  Central  Banks  will  enjoy  complete  autonomy;  it  will
regularly  provide  information  on  its  activities  and  report  on  them  to  the  other  Community
institutions. In particular, the European Central Bank will be required, pursuant to Article 109b
of the Treaty and Article 15 of the Statute of the European System of Central Banks, to publish
periodic reports on the activities of the ESCB, with a description of the current and future stance
of monetary policy. The European Parliament will be able to debate these matters and invite the
President  and  the  other  members  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European  Central  Bank  to  be
heard by its competent committees.
BIS Review   10/1998
- 3 -
In particular, the need for a “single” monetary policy will have  to  be  reconciled
with the principle of “subsidiarity”, which has also been embodied in the Statute of  the  ESCB
and is intended to permit the highest possible degree of decentralization in operational terms.
lines:
More  specifically,  provision  is  made  for  a  division  of  tasks  along  the  following
  the  decision-making  powers  in  monetary  policy  matters,  especially  with
regard to interest rates and compulsory reserves, will be centralized in the
European Central Bank. The ECB will exercise these powers  through  the
Governing  Council,  comprising  the  Governors  of  the  national  central
banks  and  the  Executive  Board,  composed  of  the  President,  the
Vice-President  and  four  other  members.  The  Executive  Board  will  be
responsible for implementing the decisions of the Governing Council on a
continuous basis;
the operational implementation of monetary policy will be entrusted to the
national central banks.
Each national central bank will thus have two tasks: it will contribute, through its
Governor, to the decisions of the Governing Council; and it will implement these decisions in its
own country.
Operations  in  the  money  and  foreign  exchange  markets  will  normally  be  carried
out by the national central banks.
Within  this  framework,  the  Bank  of  Italy  will  continue  to  carry  out  all  the
operational functions that it currently performs. The procedures for conducting monetary control
operations will be different in part from those used  today;  the  draft  legislative  decree  currently
under discussion in Parliament is designed to permit the necessary changes.
Legal convergence
The  Treaty  requires  each  member  state  to  make  its  national  legislation,  and
especially the provisions concerning its central bank, compatible with the Treaty and the Statute
of the European System of Central Banks. In particular, the Treaty requires each member state to
ensure that its central bank is independent from the government and all other political bodies; the
necessary reforms must be enacted before the introduction of the single currency.
Within  the  general  framework  laid  down  in  the  Treaty,  the  European  Monetary
Institute and the Commission have done valuable work in analyzing and interpreting the relevant
provisions  and  providing  clear  indications  of  the  criteria  to  be  followed  in  adapting  national
legislation to Community law, not least in view of the need for the latter’s uniform  application
throughout the European Union.
The  key  requirements  of  central  bank  independence  with  a  view  to  a  country’s
adoption of the single currency are:
 the task of pursuing price stability as the primary objective;
complete  autonomy  in  the  management  of  the  monetary  instruments,
interest  rates  and  monetary  and  credit  aggregates,  for  the  purpose  of
defending the internal and external value of the currency.
BIS Review   10/1998
- 4 -
Some of the  provisions  of  the  draft  legislative  decree  are  aimed  at  strengthening
the  Bank  of  Italy’s  independence,  the  essentials  of  which  are  in  fact  already  provided  for  in
Italian legislation.
At  a  higher  level  there  is  the  proposal  of  the  Joint  Parliamentary  Committee  on
constitutional  reform  for  the  Bank  of  Italy  to  be  given  constitutional  status  by  affirming  the
central bank’s independence and autonomy in the performance of its  monetary  and  supervisory
functions in the Constitution.
The  integration  of  the  national  central  banks  in  the  European  System  of  Central
Banks is to be achieved by linking the implementation at national level of measures concerning
official  interest  rates,  compulsory  reserves  and  open-market  operations  with  the  decisions
adopted by the European Central Bank.
It  is  important  to  stress  that,  in  conformity  with  the  Statute  of  the  European
System of Central Banks, the participation of the Bank of Italy in the System will  • not affect the
performance  of  the  other  tasks  that  it  is  assigned  under  national  legislation,  especially  those
related to banking supervision.
The  draft  legislative  decree  contains  the  provisions  needed  to  ensure  the
compatibility  of  Italian  legislation  with  the  Treaty  and  the  Statute  of  the  European  System  of
Central  Banks.  In  addition  to  the  competent  Italian  Parliamentary  committees,  it  has  been
submitted,  as  required,  to  the  European  Monetary  Institute  for  its  opinion.  The  provisions
guaranteeing the integration of the Bank of Italy in the ESCB will mostly come into force at the
time the single currency is adopted.
The  Statute  of  the  Bank  of  Italy  will  be  modified  in  accordance  with  the
legislative  decree  under  discussion.  The  Bank’s  Board  of  Directors  has  already  approved  the
proposed amendments, which will be put to the Extraordinary General Meeting of Shareholders
to  be  held  on  19  March:  they  will  be  rendered  compatible  with  the  final  text  of  the  legislative
decree.
The amendments to the Bank’s Statutes will then follow the procedure laid down
for their approval by the President of the Republic.
 In Italy the monetary policy approach that has been followed in the last few years,
and will be maintained in the coming years, is aimed at convincing market participants, workers
and businessmen that increases in income can only be achieved by expanding economic activity.
The action taken on the monetary front, of necessity extremely rigorous at times,
has made a major contribution to the convergence of Italy’s economy towards those of European
countries with a more firmly established tradition of stability.
The  decisions  that  will  be  taken  by  the  European  Central  Bank  will  have
maintaining price stability as their objective.
Labour  market,  incomes  and  fiscal  policies  will  increasingly  be  the  only  ones
available  to  promote  the  competitiveness  and  profitability  of  Italy’s  enterprises,  and  growth  in
production and employment. They will have to give renewed impetus to productive investment.
BIS Review   10/1998
- 5 -
The ample availability of savings, of which a large part is invested abroad at present, makes this
possible.
The  revival  of  economic  activity  in  Europe  as  a  whole  cannot  be  based  on
manoeuvres to enhance competitiveness through the exchange rate of the common currency; such
action would be in conflict with the primary objective of monetary stability. This will have to be
underpinned  by  a  strong  productive  system,  to  be  achieved  by  curbing  budgets  and  taxes,
boosting  investment  and  making  more  flexible  use  of  the  factors  of  production.  These  are  the
indispensable conditions for achieving faster growth and creating new employment.
BIS Review   10/1998
