Mr. Chan reports  on  the  Hong  Kong  dollar  post-July  1997      Speech  by  the
Deputy  Chief  Executive  of  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary  Institute,  Mr.  Norman  T.L.  Chan,  at  the
Hong Kong Business Summit ’97 organised by The Hong Kong General Chamber of Commerce
on 4/12/97.
I  am  honoured  to  have  been  invited  by  the  Hong  Kong  General  Chamber  of
Commerce  to  attend  Business  Summit  1997.  This  year’s  Summit  carries  special  significance
because this is the first Summit after the return of Hong Kong’s sovereignty to China. As Hong
Kong  enters  into  a  new  era  under  the  framework  of  “one  country,  two  systems”  and  “Hong
Kong  people  ruling  Hong  Kong”,  our  attention  has  recently  been  focused  on  the  financial
turmoil in the region and its effects on Hong Kong. In view of the limited time available, I do
not propose to go into the background why this financial turmoil has occurred. I would instead
like  to  take  this  opportunity  to  clarify  a  few  points  which  have  been  the  subjects  of  extensive
debate recently.
2.  Firstly,  I  should  reiterate  that  the  Government’s  resolve  in  maintaining  the
linked exchange rate system is absolute. Given Hong Kong’s small and open economy, the link
has been and will continue to be the most suitable arrangement for Hong Kong. Let us not forget
the fact that the link has served Hong Kong well in the last 14 years by providing an anchor for
monetary  stability,  without  which  it  would  not  have  been  possible  for  Hong  Kong  to  weather
numerous shocks during this  period  and  to  develop  into  a  leading  financial,  trade  and  services
centre  in  the  region,  with  a  per  capita  income  higher  than  many  of  the  developed  economies,
including  the  United  Kingdom.  Even  in  the  latest  regional  currency  turmoil,  the  link  has  once
again proved its  resilience  and  the  Hong  Kong  dollar  has  remained  very  stable  against  the  US
dollar. However, questions or doubts have emerged on whether the price for maintaining the link
is too high for Hong Kong.
3. This leads me to my next point. Is the price for maintaining the link too high
currency board arrangement are causing some pain, especially  on  the  asset  markets  and  on  the
finance costs for doing business generally. It is true that, under the currency board mechanism,
when  the  HK$  is  under  speculative  selling  pressure,  local  interbank  interest  rates  may  go  up
sharply, as they did on 23 October. On 24 October, the major banks raised their best lending rate
by 75 b.p. to 9.5% in view of the rising funding costs. Although the short-term interbank interest
rates have come down to low levels very quickly, the interest rates for the 1-month maturity and
beyond  had  stayed  above  10%  for  a  longer  while.  However,  since  mid-November  the  term
interest  rates  have  also  eased  steadily,  with  one  month  rate  falling  to  7.5%  early  this  week.
While some may regard the present levels of interest rates as too high and the correction in the
stock market and property market too painful, they have missed a vital point when they put all
the  blame  on  the  linked  exchange  rate  system.  This  is  because  they  have  assumed,  quite
wrongly,  that  under  a  floating  rate  system,  Hong  Kong  interest  rates  can  stay  constant  or  low
compared with what they are under the linked exchange rate system. Moreover, they assume that
the asset markets would have avoided the kind of sharp falls that we have experienced. This is
an  unrealistic  assumption  because  the  financial  turmoil  in  our  neighboring  economies  is  a
regional or even global problem from which Hong Kong cannot be immune.
4.  It  may  be  easier  to  explain  my  point  by  comparing  Hong  Kong  with  our
neighboring  economies.  You  are  of  course  aware  that  the  regional  stock  markets,  including
Hong Kong, have seen major corrections recently. If one also takes into account the depreciation
of  the  domestic  currency  against  US$  as  at  end-November,  the  stock  market  of  Thailand  has
fallen by 71% from its peak this year, Malaysia by 69.7%, Indonesia by 64%, Korea by 61% and
BIS Review   116/1997
- 2 -
the  Philippines  by  61%.  Even  Singapore’s  stock  market  suffered  a  35.7%  drop  in  US$  terms,
which is comparable to the 37.7% fall in the Hang Seng Index. Only Taiwan recorded a lower
fall of 31%, whereas  the  Nikkei  also  lost  28%.  I  quoted  these  figures  in  order  to  illustrate  the
magnitude of the turmoil and its contagion effects on the asset markets in the region. Singapore,
which  is  a  strong  economy  and  given  a  triple-A  rating  by  the  international  rating  agencies,
adopts a managed floating rate regime, but such regime has not insulated its asset markets from
the  regional  turmoil.  In  terms  of  interest  rates,  Singapore’s  one  month  interbank  rate  rose  by
almost 5 times to 16% on 27 October from around 3.6% on 2 July. Singapore’s one month rate
is now 6.25%, which is still significantly higher than the level in early July. In the case of Hong
Kong, the one month rate rose also by around 5 times from 6% in early July to a high of 30% on
23 October. At present the one month rate in Hong Kong is  around  7.5%.  Again  I  quote  these
figures to illustrate the point that even under a floating rate regime, as in the case of Singapore,
domestic interest rates can still go up sharply in the event of external shocks. It will be wrong to
assume  that  interest  rates  will  remain  stable  if  Hong  Kong  were  under  a  floating  rate  regime
when external shocks occur.
5. While a floating rate regime will not insulate Hong Kong from possible interest
rate hikes and asset market corrections when external shocks occur, to abandon the link now will
have  even  more  devastating  results.  According  to  the  analysis  conducted  by  one  of  the  major
banks in Hong Kong, a switch to a floating rate regime would lead to a sharp rise in inflation, to
a double digit figure, and a sharp fall in GDP growth for 1998. Moreover,  the  uncertainty  and
disturbance caused by the change will undermine public  confidence  in  Hong  Kong’s  monetary
system,  which  may  bring  irreparable  damage  to  Hong  Kong’s  position  as  the  leading
international financial centre in the region. In short, the price and pain for switching to a floating
rate regime will be even higher.
6.  Clearly  I  appreciate  that  Hong  Kong’s  manufacturers  will  be  facing  strong
competition  from  our  neighboring  economies  whose  currencies  have  depreciated  sharply  in
recent  months.  However,  competitive  devaluation  is  not  and  cannot  be  our  answer  to  the
problem. While attractive superficially, competitive devaluation is a risky and counterproductive
approach. As Hong Kong has to import almost all the raw materials and equipment, devaluation
of the currency does not mean that the export prices would necessarily be lowered by the same
extent  of  the  devaluation.  As  you  know  better  than  I  do,  although  price  is  always  important,
competitiveness  does  not  depend  on  price  alone,  whether  or  not  you  are  talking  about
manufactured goods or services. Competitiveness depends on a host of factors, including better
cost  control,  innovation,  entrepreneurship,  marketing  and  constant  striving  to  achieve
productivity  gains.  In  this  context,  I  cannot  help  tell  an  old,  but  true,  story  involving  a
conversation with an American friend 6 or 7 years ago, when the US$ was depreciating and the
DM and the Yen surging to new highs. He was complaining that many countries, including the
Southeast  Asian  economies,  were  manipulating 
trade
competitiveness. As a result, American goods were having a hard time selling overseas because
they were  too  expensive.  I  told  him  that,  while  it  may  or  may  not  be  true  that  some  countries
were  deliberately  keeping  their  exchange  rates  low,  the  apparent  difficulty  experienced  by  US
manufacturers  to  penetrate  the  Asian  markets  was  not  caused  by  pricing  alone.  For  example,
how could the Americans expect to sell their refrigerators to Hong Kong households if most of
the  refrigerators  they  tried  to  sell  were  almost  as  big  as  the  kitchen  of  an  average  flat  here  in
Hong Kong? How could the US car manufacturers expect to compete in the motor car market in
Hong  Kong  if  the  US  cars  were  oversized  and,  more  importantly,  had  virtually  no  post-sale
service in Hong Kong, which is so crucial in the motor car market? Of course, since then the US
manufacturers have gone a long way in improving the product types and quality, and have now
become much more competitive than they used to be.
their  exchange  rates 
to  gain 
BIS Review   116/1997
- 3 -
7. For Hong Kong to remain competitive under the linked exchange rate system,
prices,  including  land  costs  and  wages,  will  need  to  adjust.  This  adjustment  process  is  already
taking  place,  as  we  have  seen  in  the  correction  in  property  prices  and,  in  due  course,  rentals.
With the slowdown in consumer spending and easing of the demand for labour, the pressure on
wage  increases  for  next  year  should  also  reduce.  I  am  confident  that  the  flexibility  of  Hong
Kong’s  economy  will  enable  us  to  cope  with  external  shocks  effectively  and  to  regain
competitiveness. In the last 13 years, Hong Kong’s manufacturers have managed to keep the unit
value rise of Hong Kong’s exports to 3% per annum, which is marginally much lower than the
inflation rate of 3.5% in industrial countries, and well below the domestic inflation rate in terms
of  CPI  of  8%.  This  is  achieved  through  the  hard  work,  dedication  and  ingenuity  of  our
manufacturers, who have seized the opportunity to exploit the synergy between Hong Kong and
the Mainland China by relocating the land- and labour-intensive processes north of Hong Kong
while retaining the servicing and supporting base in Hong Kong.
8.  Finally,  I  would  like  to  close  by  echoing  what  Mr.  C.H.  Tung  said  in
Vancouver  during  the  APEC  meeting.  Hong  Kong,  given  its  sound  fundamentals,  robust
monetary and banking systems,  huge  foreign  reserves,  flexibility  and  resilience  in  coping  with
external  shocks,  would  be  the  first  economy  to  rebound  after  this  episode.  We  should  have
confidence  that,  while  in  the  short  run  the  markets  may  become  more  volatile  or  they  may
overshoot  from  time  to  time  and  there  may  be  pain  involved  during  the  adjustment  process,
economic fundamentals should prevail in the end. We should be confident that, as we have done
on so many occasions in the past, we shall be able to overcome this difficult period and emerge
as  a  stronger  and  more  competitive  financial  and  servicing  centre  in  Asia.  We  have  done  it
before and we can surely do it again.
BIS Review   116/1997
