Ms.  Hämäläinen  discusses  monetary  policy  in  EMU      Discourse  by  the
Governor of the Bank of Finland, Ms. Sirkka Hämäläinen, at the 1998 Penningpolitiskt Forum in
Stockholm on 22/4/98.
The launch of the single monetary policy at the start of 1999, it now seems, will
not bring any overwhelming shocks to the conduct or instrumental settings of monetary policy in
the euro area.
The implementation of monetary policy is already much the same across the EU
countries.    Moreover,  work  on  the  detailed  harmonization  of  monetary  policy  instruments  or
systems for payment transfers, needed for smoothing liquidity across the euro area, seems to be
progressing well in the EU countries.
As regards the current monetary situation, exchange rates are close to their central
rates in all the prospective EMU countries, led by market forces.  Likewise, long-term interest
rates have converged closely as a result of market expectations, and most of the key central bank
rates  -  as  well  as  short-term  market  rates  -  have  moved  into  very  close  alignment.    The
background for this is of course the broad economic convergence of prospective EMU countries.
We would nonetheless be burying our heads in the sand if  we were to overlook
the fact that in some countries there is concern about a possible pickup in inflation, at the core
countries’ interest rate level, unless fiscal policy is tightened in these countries.  These concerns
are  based  on  historical  experience.    However,  it  is  very  difficult  to  estimate  how  much
expectations regarding EMU membership have also changed the behaviour within the inflation
process.
 Decision-making  in  respect  of  the  common  monetary  policy  from  the  start  of
1999 will take place within the Governing Council of the ECB, which will be made up of the
governors  of  member-country  central  banks  and  the  members  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the
ECB.    In  the  decision-making,  each  member  will  have  one  vote,  which  means  that  a
representative  of  a  small  country  will  have  the  same  voting  power  as  a  representative  of  the
German or French central bank.
From the national central banks’ perspective, it is important to note that it is only
monetary  policy  decision-making  that  will  shift  to  the  European  level.    Other  central  bank
functions, such as those concerning the stability of the financial markets and management of the
currency  supply,  will  remain  at  the  national  level  as  will  all  monetary  policy  operations  and
investment of foreign reserve assets.  That is to say that the national central banks will continue
to be national institutions, despite their membership in the European System of Central Banks.
The national central banks will be the shareholders in the ECB and the role of the
governors  of  the  national  central  banks,  both  in  the  system  decisions  and  in  monetary
policymaking  will  be  a  central  one.    Influence  in  decision-making  will  be  based  first  on  the
one-person-one-vote principle but above all on the expertise, professional skills and activeness
of each central bank committee representative and eventually of the governor.  This means that
the national central banks will need to be able to carry out all the analysis and operations that
have been required so far but, in addition to that, to expand their expertise and analyses to the
euro-area level.
 BIS Review   35/1998
˝
- 2 -
One of the most important matters that the ECB’s governing council will have to
decide once it starts operating, is of course its monetary policy strategy.  Credibility in monetary
policy requires clear targets, so that the aims and objectives of the ECB can be explained ex ante
and the implementation of those aims can be explained ex post.  A clear target is an important
means  of  achieving  transparency  and  accountability,  i.e.  of  communicating  with  the  financial
markets, policy-makers and the general public.
Defining the objective will not be an easy matter in the new circumstances.  The
EMI has sketched two alternative strategies for monetary policy in EMU, one based on monetary
aggregates and the other on a direct inflation target.  The former has historically worked well in
Germany whereas the latter has produced  good results in recent  years in countries such as the
United Kingdom, Sweden and Finland, where demand-for-money functions have not been stable
enough for targeting purposes.
Although  theoretically  pure  forms  of  the  two  strategies  can  be  distinguished,  in
practice  most  central  banks  rely  on  elements  of  both.    Thus,  in  the  light  of  the  internal
decision-making process of the central bank, the strategic choice is not as crucial as it seems on
the surface.  Both strategies are forward-looking and both aim at the same ultimate goal - price
stability.
A big challenge concerning the efficiency of the monetary policy is the credibility
of  the  ESCB.    Besides  our  lack  of  empirical  evidence  on  the  Europe-wide  transmission
mechanism, we have no evidence on the behaviour of the ECB, i.e. the ECB has no track record
of its own.  Fortunately however, the ECB need not be built up from scratch.  First, it will inherit
credibility from the present NCBs, which have all conducted monetary policies aimed  at price
stability and convergence in accord with the principles of the Maastricht Treaty.  Secondly, its
high  degree  of  independence  will  give  the  ECB/ESCB  a  certain  amount  of  institutional
credibility right from the outset.
Recently,  we  have  heard  many  voices,  among  political  decision-makers,  on  the
one  hand,  and  academic  researchers,  on  the  other,  who  have  emphasized  the  necessity  of  the
accountability and transparency of the ECB.
Central  banks  and  central  bankers  have  since  the  onset  of  liberalization
understood  that  one  essential  ingredient  of  monetary  policymaking  is  openness.    The  more
carefully  the  central  bank  explains  its  thinking  to  the  financial  markets,  the  more  readily  the
markets’ reactions to monetary policy measures can be predicted.  That is to say, openness eases
the conduct of monetary policy and strengthens its impact.
The role of national central banks in accountability and in promoting transparency
within  the  ESCB  will  be  that  of  communicator  to  national  decision-makers,  labour  market
participants  and  the  general  public  regarding  the  analyses  and  views  of  the  ECB,  but  also
specifically regarding the domestic monetary policy transmission mechanism.
And the national central bank will need to continue analysing and forecasting its
country’s inflation path in the regime of the single monetary policy and, on this basis, present its
outlook  on  possible  national  imbalances  and  national  needs  for  corrective  measures  via  other
segments of economic policy, particularly fiscal policy.
 BIS Review   35/1998
˝
- 3 -
The  single  monetary  policy  will  of  course  bring  demanding  challenges  to
peripheral  countries  whose  industrial  structures,  behavioural  modes  and  business  cycles  have
previously diverged from those of the core countries.
As for Finland, thorough analyses have showed that external shocks have not been
much bigger for Finland than for other countries.  Instead, the domestic reactions in the economy
and economic policies to these external shocks have greatly strengthened their effects.
In  the  short  run,  inflation  rates  may  differ  somewhat  between  EMU-member
countries,  but  in  the  medium  term  harmonization  is  necessary.    The  real  costs  of  this
harmonization  will  be  smaller  when  the  common  inflation  target  is  more  clearly  credible  and
acknowledged and when all sectors are more clearly aiming at it also in the short run.  We have
seen  clear  improvement  in  this  kind  of  awareness  in  Finland  during  the  last  few  years,  but  of
course it will be acid-tested during the current economic boom.
The corporate sector has used a substantial part of its profits from good years to
improve  its  capital  structure.    It  has  built  up  a  good  buffer  to  be  used  in  bad  times  and  in
covering losses without having to cut wages or reduce staff.  Since wage developments are the
most important cost factor for these company buffers, their creation is directly connected  with
wage restraint during economic booms.
The  creation  of  buffers  is  just  as  important  for  the  public  sector  as  for  the
corporate  sector,  particularly  in  the  central  government.    It  is  necessary  to  generate  budget
surpluses  during  economic  booms,  in  order  to  have  room  for  manoeuvre  in  bad  times  and  to
endure deficits in times of recession within the framework of the Stability and Growth Pact, and
its 3 per cent of GDP limit.
Responsibility for curbing the booms and softening the recessions will shift in the
EMU world to a much greater extent than before to fiscal policy.  Here political decision-making
will face strong pressures and challenges, both in Finland and in many other countries.
On the whole, it is good to keep in mind that a monetary union country with good
central government finances will certainly have far more room for independent economic policy
manoeuvring than will a non-monetary union country with a large central government deficit and
debt.
BIS Review   35/1998
˝
