Mr.  Brash  addresses  the  concern  about  New  Zealand’s  balance-of-payments
deficit   Address by the Governor of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, Dr. Donald T. Brash, to the
Canterbury Employers’ Chamber of Commerce in Christchurch on 30/1/98.
Introduction
I am delighted to be addressing you once again, on the last Friday of January. If my
memory is correct, this is the fifth year in which I have done this, and I appreciate your tolerance in
inviting me back each year. On previous occasions, I have addressed a range of issues, often relating
to the exchange rate and to the question of whether monetary policy was too tight or too loose.
Today, I want to focus on one particular subject. Over the last few weeks, there has
been heightened public concern about New Zealand’s balance-of-payments deficit, triggered at least
in part by media reports of comments made by the International Monetary Fund in the context of their
recent review of the New Zealand economy. And this public concern is hardly surprising: at 6.4 per
cent of GDP in the year to September 1997, New Zealand’s current account deficit is already one of
the highest in the world. The Reserve Bank’s latest projections have that deficit increasing further to
nearly 8 per cent of GDP in the year to March 1998, a level comparable with that in the crisis year of
1984,  and  closely  similar  to  the  deficit  in  Thailand’s  balance  of  payments  before  its  mid-1997
difficulties. Moreover, our current account deficit is adding to a net stock of external liabilities which,
at some 80 per cent of GDP, is already probably the highest of any developed country.
So the questions I want to address today are, first, do  large  current  account  deficits
matter? And secondly, if they do matter, what should policy-makers seek to do about them?
Do large current account deficits really matter?
There  are  a  number  of  well-respected  economists  who  argue 
large
balance-of-payments deficits are not something for policy-makers to be concerned about. They argue
that  a  current  account  deficit  is  simply  an  indication  that  investment  being  undertaken  in  New
Zealand exceeds the savings of New Zealanders and that, since the public sector is running a surplus,
this  excess  of  investment  over  savings  simply  reflects  the  decisions  of  countless  individual  New
Zealanders in the private sector to borrow (or raise equity capital) to finance investment. In the longer
term, this process will be self-correcting as either New Zealanders decide not to take on additional
debt or foreigners decide not to extend additional credit. This view, in which the balance of payments
is expected to adjust relatively smoothly, without the involvement of governments or central banks, is
taken  by  such  eminent  economists  as  Max  Corden  and  John  Pitchford  in  Australia  and  Milton
Friedman in the United States.
that 
Even  economists  who  do  not  take  quite  such  a  sanguine  view  of  current  account
deficits as that concede that deficits are of much less concern today, with a floating exchange rate and
the  virtually  complete  abolition  of  the  distortions  which  previously  affected  the  allocation  of
investment,  than  was  the  case,  say,  prior  to  1984.  At  that  time,  deficits  were  often  the  result  of
substantial  fiscal  deficits  and  had  to  be  covered  by  government  borrowing  overseas  in  foreign
currency.  Today,  of  course,  the  government’s  accounts  are  in  surplus.  So  what  causes  the  sort  of
current account deficits that have recently provoked so much comment?
It  is  probably  fair  to  say  that  today’s  deficit  is  in  part  the  result  of  the  enthusiasm
which  foreigners  have  had  for  investing  in  New  Zealand.  Not,  I  should  stress,  because  foreign
investment creates  a  current  account  deficit  over  the  full  life  of  the  investment.  On  the  contrary,  I
believe it can be shown that, after taking all the direct and indirect effects into account, most foreign
investment  in  New  Zealand  actually  tends  to  have  a  beneficial  effect  on  the  balance  of  payments.
BIS Review   8/1998
- 2 -
Rather what I am saying is that, as foreign capital flows into New Zealand, it is matched by a current
account deficit.
In other words, if there is a net inflow of capital, there must of necessity be a current
account deficit. Because that is what a current account deficit actually means - it means there is a net
inflow of capital. If the current account were in balance, there would be no net capital inflow. If the
current account was in surplus, it would mean that there would be a net capital outflow. (Those who
say, and many do, that New Zealand needs an inflow of capital to finance its future development are
in effect saying that New Zealand must continue to have a current account deficit.) So in that sense,
part  of  the  reason  for  our  current  account  deficit  is  simply  a  reflection  of  the  enthusiasm  which
foreign  institutions,  companies,  and  indeed  individuals  have  had  for  investing  in  New  Zealand  in
recent years.
Some of this foreign investment has been in the form of so-called direct investment,
involving a foreign company establishing a controlling interest in a New Zealand operation. As you
know, there has been a very large amount of investment of this kind going back over many years - in
banks,  insurance  companies,  and  manufacturing  -  while  in  recent  years  the  rate  of  foreign  direct
investment  has,  if  anything,  increased  -  in  telecommunications,  food  processing,  hotels,  forestry,
commercial property, and transport.
In addition, there has been an increasing flow of so-called portfolio investment from
overseas - non-controlling investment in New Zealand equities, a huge investment in New Zealand
dollar  government  securities,  and  most  recently  a  very  large  investment  in  New  Zealand  dollar
securities issued by overseas corporations and governments, the Eurokiwi and Samurai bond issues.
These  Eurokiwi  and  Samurai  issues  have,  through  the  swap  market,  provided  New  Zealand  banks
with attractively priced fixed-term funding, keeping longer-term interest rates lower than they would
otherwise  have  been  and  making  possible  the  recent  rapid  growth  in  the  fixed  interest  rate  home
mortgage market.
New Zealanders’ enthusiasm for borrowing
But  if  this  desire  to  invest  in  New  Zealand  on  the  part  of  foreigners  had  been  the
whole story, we might have expected to see interest rates in New Zealand at levels equal to or even
below  interest  rates  abroad,  and  asset  prices  -  share  prices  in  particular  -  at  high  levels  by  world
standards as the impact of the abundant overseas capital swamped our small economy and readily met
New Zealanders’ demand for funds. Instead, while New Zealand interest rates have been very much
lower  in  recent  years  than  would  have  been  the  case  had  there  been  no  capital  inflow,  they  have
tended to be higher than  those  in  major  capital  markets,  whether  measured  in  nominal  terms  or  in
inflation-adjusted terms. The prices of shares and commercial property have tended to increase more
slowly than those in many overseas countries. This suggests that, while foreign investors have been
happy to provide capital, many have done so because New Zealand has offered unusually attractive
yields. What is striking is the willingness of New Zealanders to pay those yields. At least part of the
reason must lie in a strong demand for additional funds within New Zealand.
To some extent this demand has reflected strong investment activity in the corporate
sector,  as  recent  reforms  have  opened  up  profitable  investment  opportunities  or  have  obliged
companies to invest in cost-reducing facilities to improve their competitiveness. There has also been a
strong cyclical recovery in investment spending after the 1991 recession. Strong investment spending
widens the current account deficit in the short-term,  but  as  long  as  that  investment  turns  out  to  be
profitable,  any  foreign  capital  tapped  to  finance  it  -  whether  in  the  form  of  debt,  new  equity,  or
retained earnings - will create no problems. In fact, corporate balance sheets in New Zealand  have
generally remained healthy after the stresses of the late 1980s and early 1990s.
BIS Review   8/1998
- 3 -
But  much  of  the  demand  for  borrowed  funds  in  recent  years  has  come  from  the
household sector, and has been secured by that favourite New Zealand financial instrument, the house
mortgage. This borrowing has taken the ratio of household debt to household disposable income from
a relatively low 42 per cent as recently as mid-1990 to almost 90 per cent currently (Graph 1) - from
a level which was relatively low by international standards to around the levels of indebtedness seen
in places like the United States. It has also taken the share of loans extended to the household sector
from 31 per cent of total bank loans to 52 per cent of the total over the same period, an increase in the
dollar amount from $16 billion to $50 billion in just seven years. As Graph 2 illustrates, lending by
major  financial  institutions  to  the  household  sector  has  been  growing  markedly  more  quickly  than
nominal GDP throughout most of this decade.
Some of the borrowing by the household sector has been undertaken as  a  relatively
cheap  and  efficient  way  of  funding  small  businesses  owned  by  the  household  sector,  and  to  that
degree  is  ‘mislabelled’  as  household  sector  borrowing.  But  for  the  most  part,  the  rapid  growth  in
household indebtedness appears to have helped make possible the rapid rise in house prices seen in
much  of  the  country  in  recent  years  and,  as  employment,  incomes,  and  wealth  have  risen,  strong
consumption growth.
Obviously,  this  sort  of  strong  growth  in  lending  to  households  cannot  continue
indefinitely, but while it does there is likely to be pressure on our external accounts. Credit, after all,
is  designed  to  allow  us  to  increase  our  investment  without  sacrificing  current  consumption,  or
alternatively to increase consumption now in the expectation of higher income in the future. Both of
these mean enjoying now a level of consumption beyond what is produced locally: and in simplified
terms, that is what a current account deficit is.
BIS Review   8/1998
- 4 -
Other things being equal, a strong demand to borrow tends to push up interest rates. It
is those pressures which then draw in foreign capital. The capital inflow in turn tends to check the
extent to which interest rates rise in response to the strong borrowing demand.
The willingness of foreign investors to provide capital allows us, as a  nation,  much
greater flexibility in making our own spending and investment decisions. But of course, the foreign
investors expect to earn a return on the funds that they invest in New Zealand, and by using those
foreign funds we are taking on an obligation to pay interest or dividends on the capital used, just as
we  do  when  we  use  funds  from  a  domestic  source.  If  we  use  the  capital  unwisely,  then  we
compromise our future prospects, and that is no different when talking about four million people as a
group than it is when we talk about people individually.
The lessons of Asia
The key issue at the moment is whether a current account deficit approaching 8 per
cent of GDP, well above the 5 percent of GDP sometimes regarded as being dangerous, should be of
concern.  And  the  answer  appears  to  be  ‘not  necessarily’.  Singapore  ran  a  current  account  deficit
averaging  10  per  cent  of  GDP  for  20  years  from  1965  to  1985,  while  Canada  ran  a  deficit  which
exceeded 5 per cent of GDP for most of the 43 years from 1870 to 1913.
But what about the  recent  lessons  of  Asia?  What  about  the  risk  that  foreign  capital
might suddenly flow out again, with disastrous consequences for New Zealand banks, New Zealand
corporates, and the New Zealand dollar? Indeed, hasn’t the New Zealand dollar already been dragged
down because of foreign concerns about our links with Asia?
Let me correct one misapprehension at once. Yes, as of the middle of this week, the
New Zealand dollar had declined by some 17 per cent against the US dollar since 1 January 1997, but
this is closely similar to the extent to which the Australian dollar had declined against the US dollar
over the same period (15 per cent), and was from levels at which the New Zealand dollar was widely
BIS Review   8/1998
- 5 -
regarded as being significantly over-valued. In fact, virtually all currencies have depreciated against
the US dollar over the last year or so. This is simply another way of saying that the US dollar has
itself appreciated against virtually all currencies. By comparison to the 10 to 20 per cent depreciation
of most currencies, including the New Zealand dollar, against the US dollar, the currencies of many
East Asian countries have fallen very much more sharply - by 44 per cent in the case of Malaysia, by
50 per cent in the case of South Korea, by 52 per cent in the case of Thailand, and by 84 per cent in
the  case  of  Indonesia.  Neither  New  Zealand  nor  Australia  has  had  an  experience  even  remotely
similar.
It  is  worth  looking  briefly  at  some  of  the  factors  which  have  provoked  recent
problems in Asia because understanding these factors helps in understanding why the sorts of vicious
corrections we have witnessed in Asia are not likely to happen here.
There  appear  to  have  been  three  factors  in  particular  which  caused  what  seemed
initially like a localised currency crisis in Thailand  to  spread  so  quickly  to  embrace  many  parts  of
Asia:
   First,  a  serious  lack  of  transparency  in  many  Asian  countries  and  markets,
which made it difficult for investors to assess and understand the risks  they
were  assuming,  and  which  contributed  to  the  speed  at  which  confidence
collapsed as soon as bad news began to appear.
Second,  fairly  widespread  evidence  of  poor  credit  evaluation  by  banks  and
other  intermediaries,  perhaps  in  part  a  result  of  the  often-close  connections
between  governments,  banks,  and  big  business,  and  in  part  a  result  of
over-confidence  and  carelessness  borne  of  decades  of  strong  economic
growth. (Paul Krugman has suggested that the willingness of banks to take on
high  credit  risks  was  in  large  part  the  result  of  the  perception  that  the
liabilities  of  banks  were  effectively  government-guaranteed,  and  that  the
moral  hazard  created  by  this  perception  was  itself  the  cause  of  grossly
inadequate credit evaluation.)
Third,  the  widespread  maintenance  of  pegged  exchange  rates,  which
compromised  the  ability  of  the  countries  concerned  to  maintain  adequate
monetary  control  when  faced  with  very  large  capital  inflows,  and  which
seriously complicated financial management when problems began to emerge.
New Zealand different from Asia in several crucial respects
Of  course,  capital  could  flow  out  of  New  Zealand,  and  it  would  be  a  brave  (or
foolhardy) central banker these days who would claim ‘it can’t happen here’. Foreign investors could
decide to sell-up and leave New Zealand, and indeed New Zealand investors could do likewise, in the
absence of any controls preventing them from doing so. But I don’t think we are afflicted by any of
the particular Asian problems I have just mentioned.
To  begin  with,  a  rapid  outflow  of  capital  is  very  unlikely  if  the  policy  framework
remains sound and transparent and if those who are the recipients of the foreign capital inflow remain
creditworthy.
In that regard, there is no sign of the policy framework here being changed. Almost
all  political  parties  are  committed  to  the  retention  of  the  current  transparent  and  independent
monetary policy framework, established without dissentient vote in Parliament in  1989.  Almost  all
political  parties  recognise  the  importance  of  continuing  to  run  fiscal  surpluses  at  this  stage  of  the
demographic  cycle,  and  the  high  level  of  fiscal  transparency  is  simply  not  a  political  issue  at  all.
Almost all political parties are committed to an internationally open and competitive economy.
BIS Review   8/1998
- 6 -
And  as  far  as  creditworthiness  is  concerned,  one  of  the  major  ‘borrowers’  -  to  the
extent  that  foreign  investors  have  bought  New  Zealand  dollar  government  securities  on  the  New
Zealand market - is the government itself. The government has become markedly more creditworthy
in recent years, as the ratio of net public sector debt has declined from around 52 per cent of GDP in
the  early  1990s  to  some  27  per  cent  currently.  In  the  private  sector,  banks  have  on  average
strengthened their total capital position  since  the  beginning  of  the  decade,  and  all  registered  banks
comfortably exceeded both the tier 1 and total capital ratios prescribed by international agreement as
at the last date for which we have complete data (30 September 1997). All but two of the banks are
rated  by  one  or  more  of  the  international  credit  rating  agencies,  with  the  four  largest  banks  all
enjoying an S&P rating of  AA-  or  better.  In  addition,  of  course,  almost  all  the  banks  operating  in
New  Zealand  have  the  backing  of  financially  strong  overseas  parent  banks.  Among  corporates,
balance sheets are probably as strong as they have been at any time in the last two decades. It is in the
household sector that balance sheets are probably becoming most extended, after seven or eight years
of strong borrowing, but international creditors are protected from potential bad debt problems in that
sector  by  the  fact  that  the  foreign  capital  which  has,  in  effect,  been  lent  to  ordinary  household
borrowers has been channelled through the banking system, and, as indicated, our banks are in robust
condition.
So there seems little reason for any sudden loss of confidence leading to capital flight.
Secondly, even if there were to be a sudden flight, leading to a sharp depreciation in
the New Zealand dollar, the result would be very different in one  important  respect  from  what  we
have seen in some Asian countries in recent months. In those Asian countries currency weakness led
to  very  serious  problems  because,  previously,  as  I  have  noted,  currencies  had  been  actually  or
virtually pegged to the US dollar. This led borrowers to take on large unhedged US dollar liabilities -
these looked very cheap at the time and, with the explicit or implicit guarantee that there would be no
currency depreciation, devoid  of  currency  risk.  When  as  so  often  happens  the  countries  concerned
were forced to abandon their peg to the US dollar and the currencies fell sharply as a consequence,
the  losses  which  both  banks  and  corporates  sustained  were  often  huge,  threatening  many  of  them
with  insolvency  and  collapse.  (Indeed,  the  losses  were  magnified  because,  with  sharply  increased
liabilities expressed in local currencies, borrowers rushed to sell assets, which tended to push down
asset prices sharply as well.) These large losses in turn tended to further reduce investor confidence,
and accelerate the capital outflow.
By contrast, much of the foreign capital inflow into New Zealand has been either in
the form of equity investments, with no currency risk borne by the company receiving the capital, or
in the form of New Zealand dollar borrowings, by government and banks. The quarterly disclosure
statements  published  by  New  Zealand  banks  show  that  they  have  little  in  the  way  of  unhedged
foreign  exchange  positions  and,  although  I  do  not  have  detailed  information  on  which  to  make  a
dogmatic assertion, I would be fairly confident that the unhedged foreign exchange liabilities of New
Zealand  corporates  are  very  small.  They  have  been  operating  for  too  long  in  a  freely  floating
exchange rate environment to be unaware  of  the  risks,  and  indeed  some  still  recall  the  losses  they
sustained  by  borrowing  in  low  interest  foreign  currencies  in  the  1970s  and  1980s  when  the  New
Zealand dollar itself was pegged.
A third point to note is that, if a capital outflow did occur, interest rates would  rise
sharply  as  a  result  and  it  is  very  likely  that  the  combination  of  sharply  lower  exchange  rate  and
markedly higher interest rates would quite  quickly  reduce  the  current  account  deficit.  The  Reserve
Bank might well be blamed for the sharp rise in interest rates, and to be sure we would not be at all
opposed to such an increase since if the exchange rate fell sharply a marked increase in interest rates
would be needed to keep inflation under control. But it is also true that, unless the Bank moved to
pump  money  into  the  economy  aggressively,  any  sharp  outflow  of  capital,  whether  owned  by
foreigners or owned by New Zealanders, would necessarily result in a sharp increase in interest rates,
BIS Review   8/1998
- 7 -
since those selling New  Zealand  securities  and  other  assets  would  be  forced  to  increase  the  yields
offered on those assets in order to encourage others to buy them.
In  other  words,  with  a  floating  exchange  rate,  investors  (whether  foreign  or  local)
wishing  to  sell  out  of  New  Zealand  assets  or  the  New  Zealand  dollar  need  to  find  private  sector
buyers to sell to. The central bank is not going to be supporting the price of the New Zealand dollar,
or of New Zealand bonds, or of New Zealand shares.
And of course, although capital outflow can alter the price of assets, foreign corporate
owners can not take the land and buildings which they own with them. Those assets would remain in
New Zealand, with their ownership changing from foreign to local.
Whether or not an outflow of capital was ‘painful’ and disruptive would depend very
much on the magnitude and speed of the outflow. If, as seems quite unlikely, it happened on a large
scale and over a short period, the adjustment could involve markedly higher interest rates. Companies
exposed  to  interest  rates  and  not  benefiting  from  the  fall  in  the  exchange  rate  would  be  put  under
pressure, and some might well collapse, notwithstanding their currently-strong balance sheets. This
would be part of the process of reducing the current account deficit, as resources were displaced from
domestic  or  non-tradeable  parts  of 
into  exporting  and
import-replacement industries. Household borrowers, especially those with variable rate mortgages,
could also face some very sharp adjustments to their spending patterns.
the  economy  and  enticed  back 
So the deficit is not a matter for alarm, but we should not be complacent.
So in answer to my first question, namely, whether our large current account deficit
matters,  my  answer  is  that  it  isn’t  a  matter  for  great  alarm  at  present.  The  deficit  in  part  reflects
international enthusiasm for investing in New Zealand, and in part a judgement by many thousands of
New Zealanders that there are attractive investment opportunities in New Zealand which are worth
pursuing with borrowed funds (especially in the housing sector) and perhaps a judgement that future
incomes will rise sufficiently rapidly to support a higher level of consumption spending now. There
are  market  mechanisms  which  generally  succeed  in  reconciling  the  intentions  of  individual
households  and  firms  with  the  interests  of  the  nation  as  a  whole.  Some  other  countries  have
experienced similarly large deficits for years on end without ill effect, although it is not common to
sustain for too many years a large current account deficit, in a floating exchange rate regime, without
particularly high GDP growth rates.
Moreover, we are well placed to weather any capital outflow which might eventuate.
While a current account deficit of about the present size was associated with a foreign exchange crisis
in 1984, that situation was one where the Government was trying to maintain a fixed exchange rate
against a widespread belief that the exchange rate was over-valued.  Today,  with  the  exchange  rate
freely floating and able to adjust, month to month and hour to hour, to reflect changes in demand and
supply, the situation is fundamentally different.
But  we  should  not  be  complacent.  The  size  of  our  accumulated  external  liabilities
does, as the IMF has suggested, make us somewhat vulnerable to unpredictable external shocks, or to
a sudden loss of confidence for whatever reason. It puts a premium on maintaining the confidence of
markets that New Zealand remains a safe place in which to invest,  and  means  that  the  quality  and
transparency of economic and financial sector policies are crucial. In a situation where much of the
capital  inflow  has,  in  effect,  found  its  way  into  financing  consumption,  higher  house  prices,  and
residential investment, rather than into much higher investment in directly growth-enhancing sectors,
we  would  be  unwise  to  assume  that  we  can  sustain  a  deficit  at  around  current  levels  indefinitely.
Much will depend on the rates of economic growth we are able to sustain: the results in recent years
have been encouraging, but to adopt a cricketing analogy, the innings is really just getting underway.
BIS Review   8/1998
- 8 -
If we want to reduce the deficit, what needs to be done?
If as a country we want to reduce our vulnerability to external shocks by reducing first
our current account deficit and then, over time, our high ratio of net external liabilities to GDP, how
could this be done?
The  first  point  to  reiterate  perhaps  is  the  one  which  the  Corden/Pitchford/Friedman
school  would  probably  make,  and  that  is  that,  because  the  public  sector  is  in  surplus,  our  current
account deficit reflects decisions being made in the private sector to take on more liabilities. This will
not continue indefinitely, since at some point we are likely to find either borrowers deciding that they
have taken on enough debt or lenders making that decision for them! New Zealand has already seen a
very strong increase in the ratio of household debt to household disposable income, as already noted.
This has seemed prudent to thousands of New Zealanders, partly because house prices have increased
strongly in recent  years.  And  while  to  some  extent  it  does  make  sense  to  anticipate  future  income
growth, the ratio of house prices to incomes is currently at historically high levels - the sort of levels
reached in the mid-1970s, just before the very sharp fall in real house prices in the second half of that
decade, or in the United Kingdom before the savage correction in the late 1980s and early 1990s. If
New Zealand house prices were to falter, even more if they were to fall back somewhat over the next
year or two, as several commentators are now suggesting is very likely, we could quite quickly see a
rapid slow-down in the growth of household sector borrowing followed by a down-turn in investment
in housing and a rather broader slowdown in consumer spending. This would in turn quite quickly
produce a reasonably rapid reduction in the current account deficit, both as the demand for imports
fell  away  and  as  the  profitability  of  foreign  companies  operating  in  New  Zealand  dropped.  Any
policy issue would disappear.
But  supposing  this  does  not  happen  in  the  near  future.  Are  there  measures  which
policy-makers should be considering to reduce the deficit?
We  know  from  long  and  bitter  past  experience  that  imposing  direct  controls  on
imports is no solution. Unless matched by measures to reduce domestic spending power, consumers
initially spend on items other than controlled imports in such a way that exports tend to be reduced
and other imports increased. The balance of payments is not helped. Moreover, in time New Zealand
producers invest in the production of the items subject to import controls, and since these items are
almost by the nature of the case expensive to make in New Zealand, productivity suffers and efficient
exporters are severely hindered. There is no solution in trying to license or control imports.
The key challenge: how to increase national savings
Since  at  root  a  balance-of-payments  deficit  is  an  excess  of  investment  over  saving,
any attempt to reduce the deficit must either look to reduce investment or to increase saving. I will
assume that reducing investment is hardly an attractive policy option given the constant pressure for a
higher standard of living and more jobs, which leaves us with the question of how to increase savings
in  New  Zealand.  And  I  can’t  stress  too  strongly  that,  fundamentally,  reducing  the  current  account
deficit  is  ultimately  about  how  we  might  increase  total  national  savings  relative  to  national
investment.
For  a  great  many  years,  the  public  sector  was  a  net  dis-saver  in  New  Zealand,  as
indeed it still is in most countries in the world. This was reflected in a considerable build-up in net
public  sector  debt,  to  a  peak  of  some  52  per  cent  of  GDP  in  the  early  1990s,  as  I  have  already
mentioned. Partly as a result of the sale of government assets but mainly, since 1993/94, as a result of
running budget surpluses, debt has been roughly halved in relation to GDP and at the present time the
public sector is making a contribution of some 1.5 per cent of GDP to our total national saving effort.
This  is  a  very  much  better  performance  than  that  of  virtually  any  other  developed  country  (the
BIS Review   8/1998
- 9 -
exception,  as  to  so  much  else,  is  Singapore),  but  it  is  a  markedly  smaller  contribution  to  national
saving than the public sector was making in, say, 1995/96. In that year public sector saving amounted
to  3.7  per  cent  of  GDP.  So  in  the  last  couple  of  years  the  trend  in  public  sector  saving  has  been
unhelpful in terms of the balance-of-payments deficit, a reflection of a strong increase in public sector
spending  over  the  last  two  years  and  a  reduction  in  tax  rates.  One  way  of  reducing  the
balance-of-payments  deficit  might  be  to  increase  the  public  sector  surplus  again,  although  nobody
should  under-estimate  the  difficulties  of  doing  that  in  a  country  where  pressure  to  increase
government expenditure is relentless.
New Zealand’s record of household sector savings seems to have been relatively poor
for many years.  There  have  doubtless  been  many  reasons  for  this.  In  the  high  inflation  1970s  and
early  1980s,  when  many  interest  rates  were  controlled  at  artificially  low  levels,  the  after-tax  real
return  on  savings  invested  in  fixed  interest  securities  was  strongly  negative,  creating  a  strong
disincentive to save. This situation changed markedly in the mid-1980s, with positive after-tax real
interest rates, but at about the same time financial sector liberalisation greatly increased the ability of
many households to borrow; this too almost certainly discouraged net saving. And of course for most
of the last half century New Zealanders have been encouraged to believe that the things  for  which
people save up in many other countries - education, medical care, and retirement - would largely be
taken care of by government. We were effectively told: you don’t need to save and, by the way, if
you do, you’re a fool, because government-sourced inflation will steal a large chunk of what you save
anyway.
I’m frankly not sure how this culture of low household-sector saving can be changed.
Clearly there is a significant section of the community that has no surplus income at all. To suggest
that  a  solo  parent  living  on  benefit  has  scope  for  increased  saving  is  absurd,  and  would  be
presumptuous in the extreme coming from me. But it is also true that too many New Zealanders on
higher incomes still have attitudes to their personal finances that only made sense in the high inflation
1970s and early-1980s. The mind-set was that only a fool had personal savings, and the quick and the
clever were in debt up to their eyeballs.  Indeed,  those  attitudes  were  sensible  from  an  individual’s
point of view, with negative real interest rates and rising asset prices. Those attitudes no longer make
sense.
Part of the problem in recent years may have been the less-than-ideal mix of monetary
conditions,  with  interest  rates  too  low  to  encourage  saving  or  discourage  borrowing  and  with  the
exchange  rate  too  high  to  allow  the  export  and  import-competing  sectors  to  grow.  This  mix  of
monetary  conditions  was  particularly  unhelpful  when  most  of  the  inflation  pressures  were  in  the
domestic  parts  of  the  economy,  especially  the  housing  sector,  and  not  in  the  export  and
import-competing sectors. The Reserve Bank began to tighten monetary policy early in 1994 to head
off the inflationary pressures which we projected at that time. By the end of that year, 90 day interest
rates had risen from around 4.5 per cent in January to close to 10 per cent, while the exchange rate
had increased from 57 on the trade-weighted index (TWI) to 60. Through the next nine quarters, to
the  end  of  March  1997,  interest  rates  never  went  much  above  10  per  cent,  but  the  exchange  rate
continued  to  increase  until  the  TWI  reached  69.  As  a  consequence,  lending  by  major  financial
institutions to the private sector continued growing at rates more than double that of nominal GDP
growth. In other words, although the exchange rate was putting great pressure on the exposed parts of
the  economy,  interest  rates  were  not  nearly  high  enough  to  restrain  a  huge  surge  in  private  sector
borrowing.
But hold on, you may be saying. Don’t we have some of the highest inflation-adjusted
interest rates in the developed world? And so we do, if one compares interest rates with inflation in
the CPI. But of course few of us borrow to buy the goods and services in  the  CPI  basket.  Rather,
most  of  us  borrow  to  buy  assets,  and  particularly  real  estate.  And  when  our  interest  rates  are
compared with changes in  an  index  of  house  prices,  as  shown  in  Graph  3,  it  can  be  seen  that  our
BIS Review   8/1998
- 10 -
mortgage interest rates adjusted by house price inflation have been very low in recent years, and well
below  those  in  Australia.  For  whatever  reason,  our  real  interest  rates  have  not  been  seen  as
particularly  high  by  New  Zealanders  -  despite  all  the  protests  to  the  contrary.  If  they  had  seemed
high, we would not have been increasing our borrowings by 10 to 15 per cent per annum, and we
would have been increasing our saving. As noted earlier, the ratio  of  household  debt  to  household
disposable income has more than doubled over the last seven years, and most of this increase has had
nothing to do with buying food and other necessities.
However,  central  banks  have  very  limited  ability  to  influence  the  mix  of  monetary
conditions.  This  is  ultimately  determined  by  the  decisions  of  countless  thousands  of  individual
investors here and abroad, and by the actions and expected actions of other central banks.
As I have acknowledged previously, we gave some consideration when the exchange
rate was at its peak in early 1997 to undertaking some form of so-called sterilised intervention in an
attempt  to  reduce  the  exchange  rate  and  increase  interest  rates  -  without  risk  to  the  inflation
objective - since most of the inflationary pressures were coming from sectors relatively immune from
exchange rate pressure but more susceptible, we believed, to interest rate pressure. But most of the
international  evidence  suggests  that  such  sterilised  intervention  has  little  lasting  effect  unless  it  is
simply a precursor to an easing of overall monetary policy.
I believe that the introduction of the Monetary Conditions Index in  December  1996
may  have  helped  to  change  the  mix  of  monetary  conditions  to  some  extent  by  eliminating  the
impression which had grown up that we had an exchange rate target as well as an inflation target, but
even this is by no means certain.
If  the  central  bank  can  not  do  much  to  improve  our  national  saving  performance,
could the Government do more? I have already mentioned the importance of the Government itself
continuing  to  run  fiscal  surpluses.  There  are  almost  certainly  other  policies  which  would  have  an
effect on private sector saving performance.
BIS Review   8/1998
- 11 -
For  example,  there  may  be  some  scope  to  further  reduce  our  relatively  heavy
dependence  on  raising  government  revenue  from  the  taxation  of  income,  in  favour  of  relatively
greater  reliance  on  taxes  on  expenditure,  thus  increasing  the  incentive  to  produce  and  save.
Unfortunately,  there  is  very  little  evidence  that  specific  tax  incentives  for  saving  would  increase
overall  private  sector  saving  (as  distinct  from  changing  its  form),  and  some  evidence  that  national
saving would actually be diminished by such incentives, because of the cost to public sector savings
of providing the tax incentives.
There  is  probably  an  on-going  need  to  encourage  New  Zealanders  to  take  more
responsibility  for  their  own  future,  though  how  this  can  be  done  after  so  many  decades  of
encouraging them to believe that doing so is entirely unnecessary is a political challenge of mammoth
proportions. At very least there is a pressing need for a multi-party consensus both to reassure New
Zealanders that future governments will be able to provide a basic safety net for all in retirement, and
to  make  it  clear  that  those  wanting  a  more  comfortable  lifestyle  in  retirement  need  to  start  saving
now.
There is also the superficially attractive option of attempting to widen the gap between
New Zealand interest rates and those overseas through some direct policy measures. If this could be
achieved, the argument runs, New Zealand interest rates could be driven up to the point where New
Zealanders were encouraged to kick the borrowing habit without provoking a huge inflow of foreign
capital  and  the  related  increase  in  the  current  account  deficit.  This  is  a  route  which  Chile,  for
example, has followed, requiring a part of all monies borrowed overseas to be deposited for one year
in  a  non-interest-bearing  account  with  the  central  bank.  Others  have  noted  the  possibility  of
reintroducing a withholding tax on interest payments to foreigners. Such proposals should be treated
very cautiously. Not only would there be significant administrative problems in ensuring compliance
with such measures but the longer-term costs of undermining investor confidence in New Zealand’s
commitment to free and open capital markets would weigh heavily against any possible shorter-term
adjustment gains.
Alas,  none  of  the  possible  policy  changes  to  encourage  private  sector  saving  -  or
reduce private sector borrowing - is politically easy. But then living beyond our means carries risks
as well. I myself do not think that these risks are terribly large at present, but the longer we continue
living beyond our means, the greater those risks become.
New Zealand is relatively prosperous, is well-endowed with educated people, and has
natural resources which many others would give their eye teeth for. It is not obvious to me that we
should  be  content  to  be  a  heavy  user  of  the  savings  of  others  indefinitely,  especially  when  a
significant  part  of  those  foreign  savings  is  being  used  not  to  generate  faster  economic  growth  but
simply to buy ourselves larger houses.
BIS Review   8/1998
