Mr.  Greenspan’s  testimony  on  the  international  economic  and  financial
system      Testimony  of  the  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal  Reserve
System, Mr. Alan Greenspan, before the Committee on Banking and Financial Services  of  the
US House of Representatives on 16/9/98.
As I testified before this Committee in the midst of the Mexican financial crisis in
early  1995,  major  advances  in  technology  have  engendered  a  highly  efficient  and  increasingly
sophisticated international financial system. The system has fostered impressive growth in world
trade and in standards of living for the vast majority of nations who have chosen to participate in
it.
But  that  same  efficient  financial  system,  as  I  also  pointed  out  in  that  earlier
testimony,  has  the  capability  to  rapidly  transmit  the  consequences  of  errors  of  judgment  in
private investments and public policies to all corners of the world at historically unprecedented
speed.  Thus,  problems  that  appeared  first  in  Thailand  more  than  a  year  ago  quickly  spread  to
other  East  Asian  economies  that  are  relatively  new  participants  in  the  international  financial
system,  and  subsequently  to  Russia  and  to  some  degree  to  eastern  Europe  and  Latin  America.
Even  long-time  participants  in  the  international  financial  community,  such  as  Australia,  New
Zealand, and Canada, have experienced the peripheral gusts of the financial turmoil.
Japan, still trying to come to grips with the bursting of its equity and real estate
bubbles of the late 1980s, has experienced further setbacks  as  its  major  Asian  customers  have
been forced to retrench. Reciprocally, its banking system problems and weakened economy have
exacerbated the difficulties of its Asian neighbors.
The  relative  stability  of  China  and  India,  countries  whose  restrictions  on
international financial flows have insulated them to some extent from the current maelstrom, has
led some to conclude that the relatively free flow of capital is detrimental to economic growth
and standards of living. Such conclusions, in my judgment, are decidedly mistaken.
The most affected emerging East Asian economies, despite the sharp contraction
in their economic output during the past year, have retraced, on average, only one-sixth of their
per capita growth over the past ten years. Even currently, their average per capita incomes are
more than 2½ times the levels of India and China despite the unquestioned gains both have made
in recent years as they too have moved partially to join the international financial community.
Moreover, outside of Asia, several East European countries have made significant
progress  towards  the  adoption  and  implementation  of  market  systems  and  have  increasingly
integrated their financial systems into the broader world context to the evident benefit of their
populations. Latin American nations, though currently under pressure, have largely succeeded in
opening  up  their  economies  to  international  financial  flows,  and  more  rapidly  rising  living
standards have been the result.
It is clear, nonetheless, that participation in the international financial system with
all its benefits carries with it an obligation to maintain a level of stability and a set of strong and
transparent institutions and rules if an economy is to participate safely and effectively in markets
that have become highly sensitive to misallocation of capital and other policy errors.
When  domestic  financial  systems  fail  for  lack  of  adequate  institutional
infrastructures, the solution is not to turn back to a less turbulent, but also less prosperous, past
BIS Review   72/1998
- 2 -
regime of capital controls, but to strengthen the domestic institutions that are the prerequisite for
engaging in today’s international financial system.
Blocking the exodus or repatriation of capital, as some of the newer participants in
the international financial system appear inclined to do after they get into trouble, is, of course,
the equivalent of the economy receiving a subsidized injection of funds. If liquidity is tight, the
immediate effect of controls can be relief from the strain of meeting obligations and a temporary
sense of well-being. This is an illusion however. The obvious consequence of confiscating part,
or  all,  of  foreign  investors’  capital  and/or  income,  is  to  ensure  a  sharp  reduction  in  the
availability of new foreign investment in the future.
The  presumption  that  controls  can  be  imposed  temporarily,  while  an  economy
stabilizes, and then removed, gives insufficient recognition to the imbalances in an economy that
emerge  when  controls  are  introduced.  Removing  controls  subsequently  creates  its  own  set  of
problems, which most governments, inclined to impose controls in the first place, are therefore
loathe to do. Indeed, controls are often employed to avoid required -- but frequently politically
difficult -- economic adjustments. There are many examples in history of controls imposed and
removed, but rarely without great difficulty and cost.
To  be  sure,  any  economy  can  operate  with  its  borders  closed  to  foreign
investment.  But  the  evidence  is  persuasive  that  an  economy  deprived  of  the  benefits  of  new
technologies, and inhospitable  to  risk  capital,  will  be  mired  at  a  suboptimal  standard  of  living
and slow growth rate associated with out-of-date technologies.
It  is  often  stipulated  that  while  controls  on  direct  foreign  investment  and  its
associated  technology  transfer  are  growth  inhibiting,  controls  on  short-term  inflows  do  not
adversely  affect  economic  welfare.  Arguably,  however,  the  free  flow  of  short-term  capital
facilitates the servicing of direct investments as well as the financing of trade. Indeed, it is often
difficult to determine whether certain capital flows are direct investments or short term in nature.
Chile is often cited as an example of the successful use of controls on short-term capital inflows.
But in response to the most recent international financial turmoil, Chile has chosen to lower its
barriers in order to encourage more inflows.
Those  economies  at  the  cutting  edge  of  technology  clearly  do  not  need  foreign
direct investment to sustain living standards and economic growth. The economy of the United
States in the 1950s, for example, needed little foreign investment and yet was far more dominant
in the world then, than it is today.
That was a major change from our experiences of the latter half of the nineteenth
century, when the vast amount of  investment  and  technology  from  abroad  played  a  significant
role in propelling the US economy to world-class status.
Even today, though we lead the world in many of the critical technologies, we still
need to borrow a substantial share of the mobile pool of world savings to finance our level of
domestic investment. Were we unable to do so, our standard of living would surely suffer. But
the inflow of foreign capital would be much reduced if there were uncertainties about whether
the capital could be freely repatriated.
While historically there could be considerable risk in American investments -- for
example, some nineteenth century investments in American railroads entailed large losses -- the
freedom of repatriation and the sanctity of private contracts were, with rare exceptions, secure.
BIS Review   72/1998
- 3 -
Our  experiences,  and  those  of  others,  raise  the  question  of  the  sustainability  of
free international capital flows when the conditions fostering and protecting them are impaired or
absent.
Specifically, an economy whose private and/or public sectors have become heavy
net  debtors  in  foreign  currency  is  at  risk  of  default,  especially  when  its  exchange  rate
unexpectedly moves adversely. Clearly, should default become widespread among a number of
economies,  the  flow  of  international  capital  to  other  economies  perceived  as  potentially  in
similar circumstances will slow and in certain instances reverse. The withdrawal of the ongoing
benefits of free flowing capital, as recent history has so amply demonstrated, often can be abrupt
and disruptive.
The key question is obviously how do private sector entities and governments and,
by extension, economies as a whole allow themselves through currency mismatches to reach the
edge  of  insolvency?  Indeed,  where  was  the  appropriate  due  diligence  on  the  part  of  foreign
investors?
Investors  will,  on  occasion,  make  misjudgments,  and  borrowers  will,  at  times,
misread their capabilities to service debt. When market prices and interest rates adjust promptly
to evidence of such mistakes, the consequences of the mistakes are generally contained and, thus,
rarely cumulate to pose significant systemic risk.
There  was  some  evidence  of  that  process  working  in  the  latter  part  of  the
nineteenth  century  and  early  twentieth  century  when  international  capital  flows  were  largely
uninhibited.  Losses,  however,  in  an  environment  where  gold  standard  rules  were  tight  and
liquidity constrained,  were  quickly  reflected  in  rapid  increases  in  interest  rates  and  the  cost  of
capital generally. This tended to delimit the misuse of capital and its consequences. Imbalances
were  generally  aborted  before  they  got  out  of  hand.  But  following  World  War  I  such  tight
restraints  on  economies  were  seen  as  too  inflexible  to  meet  the  economic  policy  goals  of  the
twentieth century.
From the 1930s through the 1960s and beyond, capital controls in many countries,
including most industrial countries, inhibited international capital flows and to some extent the
associated  financial  instability  --  presumably,  however,  at  the  cost  of  significant  shortfalls  in
economic  growth.  There  were  innumerable  episodes,  of  course,  where  individual  economies
experienced  severe  exchange  rate  crises.  Contagion,  however,  was  generally  limited  by  the
existence of restrictions on capital movements that were at least marginally effective.
In the 1970s and 1980s, recognition of the inefficiencies associated with controls,
along  with  newer  technologies  and  the  deregulation  they  fostered,  gradually  restored  the  free
flow of international capital prevalent a century earlier. In the late twentieth century, however,
fiat  currency  regimes  have  replaced  the  rigid  automaticity  of  the  gold  standard  in  its  heyday.
More  elastic  currencies  and  markets,  arguably,  are  now  less  sensitive  to  and,  hence,  slower  to
contain the misallocation of capital. Market contagion across national borders has consequently
been  more  prevalent  and  faster  in  today’s  international  financial  markets  than  appears  to  have
been the case a century ago under comparable circumstances.
As  I  pointed  out  before  this  Committee  almost  a  year  ago,  a  good  part  of  the
capital  that  flowed  into  East  Asia  in  recent  years  (largely  in  the  1990s)  probably  reflected  the
BIS Review   72/1998
- 4 -
large  surge  in  equity  prices  in  most  industrial  economies,  especially  in  the  United  States.  The
sharp rise induced a major portfolio adjustment out of then perceived fully priced investments in
western  industry  into  the  perceived  bargain  priced,  but  rapidly  growing,  enterprises  and
economies  of  Asia.  The  tendency  to  downplay  the  risks  of  lending  in  emerging  markets,
reinforced  by  the  propensity  of  governments  explicitly  or  implicitly  to  guarantee  such
investments in a number of cases, doubtless led to an excess of lending that would not have been
supported in an earlier age.
As I also pointed out in previous testimony, standards of due diligence on the part
of both lenders and borrowers turned somewhat  lax  in  the  face  of  all  the  largess  generated  by
abundant capital gains and all the optimism about the prospects for growth in the Asian region.
The consequent emergence of heavy losses and near insolvency of a number of borrowing banks
and nonfinancial businesses engendered a rush by foreign capital to the exits and induced severe
contractions in economies with which borrowers and policymakers were unprepared and unable
to cope.
At that point the damage to confidence and the host economies had already been
done. Endeavors now to block repatriation of foreign funds, while offering temporary cash flow
relief,  have  significant  long-term  costs  and  clearly  should  be  avoided,  if  at  all  possible.  I
recognize that if problems are allowed to fester beyond the point of retrieval, no market-oriented
solution appears possible. Short-term patchwork solutions to achieve stability are presumed the
only feasible alternatives. When that point is reached, an economy is seen as no longer having
the capability of interacting normally with the international financial system, and is inclined to
withdraw behind a wall of insulation.
It must be remembered, however, that the  financial  disequilibria  that  caused  the
initial problems would not have been addressed. Unless they are, those problems will reemerge.
As I implied earlier with respect to the nineteenth century American experience,
there  are  certain  conditions  precedent  to  establishing  a  viable  environment  for  international
capital investment, one not subject to periodic systemic crises.
Some mechanism must be in place to enhance due diligence on the part of lenders,
but especially of borrowers individually and collectively. Losses of lenders do on occasion evoke
systemic risks, but it is the failure of borrowers to maintain viable balance sheets and an ability to
service their debts that creates the major risks to international stability. The banking systems in
many  emerging  East  Asian  economies  effectively  collapsed  in  the  aftermath  of  inappropriate
borrowing, and large unhedged exposures, in foreign currencies.
Much  will  be  required  to  bolster  the  fragile  market  mechanisms  of  many,  but
certainly not all, economies that have recently begun to participate in the international financial
system. Doubtless at the head of the list is reinforcing the capabilities of banking supervision in
emerging  market  economies.  Conditions  that  should  be  met  before  engaging  in  international
borrowing need to be promulgated and better monitored by domestic regulatory authorities.
Market pricing and  counterparty  surveillance  can  be  expected  to  do  most  of  the
job of sustaining safety and soundness. The experience of recent years in East Asia, however, has
clearly been less than reassuring. To be sure, lack of transparency and timely data inhibited the
more sophisticated risk evaluation systems from signaling danger. But that lack itself ought  to
have  set  off  alarms.  As  one  might  readily  expect,  today’s  risk  evaluation  systems  are  being
improved as a consequence of recent failures.
BIS Review   72/1998
- 5 -
Just as importantly, if not more so, unless weak banking systems are deterred from
engaging in the type of near reckless major international  borrowing  that  some  systems  in  East
Asia  engaged  in  during  the  first  part  of  the  1990s,  the  overall  system  will  continue  at  risk.  A
better  regime  of  bank  supervision  among  those  economies  with  access  to  the  international
financial  system  needs  to  be  fashioned.1  In  addition,  the  resolution  of  defaults  and  workout
procedures require significant improvements in the legal infrastructures in many nations seeking
to participate in the international financial system.2
None  of  these  critical  improvements  can  be  implemented  quickly.  Transition
support  by  the  international  financial  community  to  those  in  difficulty  will,  doubtless,  be
required.  Such  assistance  has  become  especially  important  since  it  is  evident  from  the  recent
unprecedented swings in currency exchange rates  for  some  of  the  emerging  market  economies
that the international financial system has become increasingly more sensitive than in the past to
shortcomings  in  domestic  banks  and  other  financial  institutions.  The  major  advances  in
technologically  sophisticated  financial  products  in  recent  years  have  imparted  a  discipline  on
market participants not seen in nearly a century.
Whatever international financial assistance is provided must be carefully shaped
not to undermine that discipline. As a consequence, any temporary financial assistance must be
carefully tailored to be conditional and not encourage undue moral hazard.
It can be hoped that despite the severe trauma that most of the newer participants
in  the  international  financial  system  are  currently  experiencing,  or  perhaps  because  of  it,
improvements will emerge to the benefit, not only of the emerging market economies but, of the
long-term participants of the system as well.
1 
2 
Parenthetically, a century ago, banks were rarely subsidized and, hence, were required by the market to hold
far more capital than they do now. In today’s environment, bank  supervision  and  deposit  insurance  have
displaced the need for high capital-asset ratios in industrial countries. Many of the new participants in the
international financial system have had neither elevated capital, nor adequate supervision. This shortfall is
now generally recognized and being addressed.
There are, of course, other reforms that I believe need to be addressed. These were outlined in my earlier
testimonies before this Committee.
BIS Review   72/1998
