Mr. Chon speaks on the topic  “Korea: moving on from the crisis”   Address
by  the  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Korea,  Mr.  Chol-Hwan  Chon,  at  the  1999  Emerging  Markets
Roundtable hosted by Euromoney on 8/10/98.
I  am  very  happy  to  be  with  you  today  to  explain  our  efforts  to  reshape  the
economic and financial fabric of Korea. This is all the more so since I am keenly conscious of the
vital role that you as investors play in the international economy.
Just under a year ago, Korea faced a very difficult situation. But the worst of the
specific  Korean  problems  now  appear  to  be  over.  Some  sectors  of  the  economy  are  gradually
returning to a stable track. Let me take this opportunity to express my hearty thanks to all of you
for your cooperative support. I hope that my words today will help you gain a clear picture of
what has been happening in the Korean economy.
Development and Causes of the Crisis
The  alarm  bells  should  already  have  been  sounding  by  the  mid-nineties.  With
trade and capital market liberalization, firms had found themselves drawn into the global market.
Nevertheless, they did not adjust to the new environment in which the market ruled, but simply
pursued the expansion strategies of an earlier development era. Also, the government failed to
establish  a  market  system  well  geared  to  the  changing  world.  The  consequent  ambitious  but
imprudent investment brought high growth at first, but  deepened  the  high  costs-low  efficiency
structure of the Korean economy.
Deteriorating corporate sector competitiveness pushed up the ratio of the current
account deficit to GDP from 1 percent in 1994 to 4.7 percent in 1996. Furthermore, from early
last year, a number of highly leveraged large companies that had been hit by sluggish sales and
low profitability finally collapsed under their huge debt. These failures in turn undermined the
soundness  of  financial  institutions  with  large  corporate  exposures.  A  vicious  downward  spiral
was set in motion.
Meanwhile,  the  contagion  of  the  Thai  baht’s  devaluation  last  July  spread  like
wildfire.  This  further  unsettled  foreign  investors  who  had  been  apprehensively  eyeing  the
weakening  of  both  companies  and  financial  institutions  in  Korea.  Reflecting  this,  S&P’s  and
Moody’s  downgraded  Korea’s  long-term  sovereign  rating  very  sharply  last  October,  which
caused foreign investors to withdraw their credit lines hastily. Liquid foreign exchange reserves
drained away rapidly leaving Korea  on  the  brink  of  national  insolvency.  The  government  then
had to turn to the IMF in late November.
The jury is still out on what actually caused the Korean crisis, but there were three
major contributory factors; namely, inefficiency caused by a failure to observe market principles,
the  loss  of  market  confidence  caused  by  a  lack  of  transparency,  and  inappropriate  policy
responses to the evolving problems.
The first of these was perhaps  the  most  fundamental.  The  Korean  economy  had
been largely government-directed for many years and lacked true market discipline. In pursuit of
BIS Review   79/1998
- 2 -
rapid growth, “big” had been the name of the game so that the principle of too-big-to-fail had
become an unwritten law.
Financial institutions, under the government’s wing, routinely made loans to the
corporate  sector  without  thoroughly  screening  investment  plans.  Workers  and  depositors  also
turned  a  blind  eye  to  market  principles.  Moral  hazard  was  widespread  and  high  cost-low
efficiency problems persisted.
The  second  factor  I  mentioned  was,  however,  the  more  immediate  cause  of  the
financial  crisis.  The  accounting  and  disclosure  systems  of  Korea  fell  short  of  global  norms,
making it difficult to grasp a true picture of firms’ condition. This lack of transparency, as the
symptoms of a crisis emerged, led to a rush for the exit since no discrimination could be made as
to  quality.  But  it  should  be  also  borne  in  mind  that  before  the  crisis,  this  obscurity  had  led
foreigners to invest in Korea without scrutinizing carefully the actual status of firms.
Last,  but  not  the  least,  was  that  the  policy  responses  to  the  looming  crisis  were
woefully inadequate; that they were mistimed; and that the markets were sent confusing signals
by inconsistencies among them. One prime example was the retention of a narrow currency band
despite  the  mounting  downward  pressure  on  the  won.  This  several  times  brought  the  foreign
exchange market to a halt as the won hit its lower limit shortly after opening. Another example
was the dithering over what to do with the distressed Kia group. The failure to proceed swiftly,
fairly and on the basis of market principles destroyed the incumbent administration’s remaining
credibility.
Response to the Crisis
Economic  policies  have  since  last  December  been  closely  coordinated  with  the
IMF. On the macroeconomic policy front, the Bank of Korea raised its market intervention rate
from 12 percent to over 30 percent to stabilize the foreign exchange market. Korea also shifted to
a free-floating exchange rate system.
Along with stringent macroeconomic policy, structural reforms are now underway
throughout the financial and corporate sectors.
The  focus  of  financial  sector  restructuring  is  on  the  exit  of  unsound  financial
institutions,  the  resolution  of  the  overhang  of  bad  loans  and  the  strengthening  of  prudential
supervision and disclosure requirements.
Five  ailing  banks  have  been  resolved  through  a  “Purchase  and  Assumption”
formula.  Korea  First  Bank  and  Seoul  Bank  whose  capital  was  reduced  in  January  were
recapitalized  by  the  government’s  subscription  of  public  enterprise  stocks.  Government-held
shares  in  these  two  banks  will  be  sold  under  open  bidding  to  domestic  and  foreign  investors
before  the  end  of  October.  Sixteen  out  of  thirty  merchant  banking  corporations,  which  had
contributed  to  the  crisis,  have  been  already  shut  down,  and  a  number  of  distressed  nonbank
financial institutions, such as securities companies and insurance companies, have been closed or
suspended.
progress  of 
Also, the bank and merchant banks now in business are being monitored on the
their 
include  mergers,
target  BIS  ratios  and  rehabilitation  plans,  which 
BIS Review   79/1998
- 3 -
recapitalization  and  sharp  reductions  in  branches  and  staff.  With  this  pressure  to  meet  strict
capital adequacy ratios and improve competitiveness, a wave of mergers is taking place in  the
financial industry. This is supported by the government through the purchase of non-performing
loans and capital injection. Three large mergers among banks have already been announced. This
consolidation of the banking sector is likely to continue for some time.
To improve transparency, standards for the classification of non-performing loans,
the  accumulation  of  loan  loss  provisions,  and  disclosure  have  all  been  brought  into  line  with
internationally accepted standards.
By revising the General Banking Act, the government allowed a foreign investor
to hold more than 10% of a bank’s total stocks with the permission of the Financial Supervisory
Commission.
Restructuring of the corporate sector is now underway across many dimensions.
First, all new mutual guarantees among companies belonging to a chaebol, which
were a main tool in fund-raising for them, have been forbidden since April 1998. Member-firms
will  also  be  obliged  to  retire  all  outstanding  cross-payment  guarantees  completely  by  March
2000.
Second,  commercial  banks  are  playing  a  vital  role  in  the  exit  of  failed  firms
through  agreements  between  large  firms  and  their  main  creditor  banks  on  improving  capital
structure. A first round which slated fifty-five non-viable firms from sixty-four conglomerates for
exit was announced last June. These firms will have their credit lifelines turned off by the denial
of fresh bank credit and the calling-in of loans. The process will continue in the future.
Third,  the  chaebol  will  have  to  provide  combined  financial  statements  from  the
fiscal year 1999. This should strip away the veil that has hidden their true position. With regard
to corporate governance, the rights of minority shareholders have also been greatly strengthened.
Fourth,  ceilings  on  foreign  investment  in  Korean  equities  have  now  been
abolished and hostile takeovers by foreigners allowed. Foreigners may now also buy and sell real
estate on a national treatment basis. This September, with the passage of the “Foreign Investment
Promotion Act”, all foreign investors in foreign investment zones are given full exemption from
corporation tax and income tax for the first seven years of operation, and after that a 50 percent
exemption for a further three years.
All  of  these  efforts  are  focused  on  shifting  our  economy  from  a  government-
directed to a market-oriented system. We all recognize that rebuilding the economy on market
principles is the one and the only way to achieve a lasting recovery from the crisis.
Recent Economic Trends
Since  the  outbreak  of  the  crisis,  we  have  striven  for  foreign  exchange  market
stabilization and overall structural reform. As a result, the exchange rate has gradually regained
stability.  The  won  tumbled  to  about  2,000  won  per  dollar  at  one  stage  but  has  recovered  to
around  the  1,300  to  1,400  won  range  thanks  to  the  big  improvement  in  supply-demand
conditions in the foreign exchange market helped by the large current account  surplus.  In  step
BIS Review   79/1998
- 4 -
with the improved exchange market conditions, market interest rates have been easing back to
their  pre-crisis  levels.  For  example,  the  CP  rate  dropped  from  a  peak  of  over  40  percent  last
December to 11 percent level recently.
But  the  real  sector  has  been  going  through  serious  hardships  with  the  marked
erosion of consumer and investor confidence, a deepening credit crunch, sharply negative GDP
growth, a continuing stream of corporate insolvencies, and a steep rise in unemployment.
During the second quarter of 1998, the GDP growth rate registered -6.6 percent.
The number of the unemployed increased to 1.58 million in August, which was more than three
times the level of a year ago. And there is a concern that the present asset-price deflation may
trigger more general deflation with the loss of purchasing power.
It  is  true  that  structural  adjustment  is  never  without  pain.  However,  a  deep  and
prolonged  depression  could  sap  the  country’s  growth  potential.  And  with  no  adequate  social
safety net in place, a steep run-up in unemployment could unleash social unrest.
Concerned to prevent such scenarios, the Korean government decided to increase
public spending in agreement with the IMF.
However, the government initiative should not be interpreted as full-scale pump
priming.  The  overwhelming  stress  is  still  on  structural  reform.  The  worry  is  that  too  deep  a
depression might stand in the way of structural reform itself. A mild stimulus would, in contrast,
be beneficial for the structural adjustment process.
This year will see sharply negative growth for the Korean economy. But provided
restructuring is successful, there should be a renewal of confidence in the country on the part of
international investors. Macroeconomic fundamentals should then start to look a bit better by the
second half of next year, with a shift to mildly positive GDP growth, albeit at a meager level.
Concluding Remarks
To sum up, Korea has made a concerted national effort to recover from the crisis
through  bold  structural  reforms.  I  think,  however,  there  was  some  trial  and  error  and  ill-
conceived policies were adopted in the process of the structural reform. As you are well aware, it
is very difficult to complete reform at a stroke without making mistakes, because reform calls for
fairness  in  the  sharing  of  the  pain  among  all  parties.  I  can,  though,  assert  that  Korea  is  quite
determined to bring about a sound and vital economy on the basis of the market mechanism. Let
me  then  earnestly  request  you  not  to  write  off  the  future  of  Korea  because  of  previous
shortsighted policies or temporary setbacks in pursuing structural reform.
A  recent  survey  by  the  prominent  journal  “The  Economist”  pointed  out  that
Koreans were optimistic and were confident that the future would be better although they were
dissatisfied  with  present  life.  This  attitude  was  cited  as  a  driving  force  for  Asian  economic
development, by the translation of future hopes into reality through hardwork and thrift.
Korea,  which  has  endured  many  ordeals  throughout  its  long  history,  will  work
another  economic  miracle  with  this  courage  and  hope.  I  hope  that  you  will  take  note  of  our
efforts and be active in your support.
BIS Review   79/1998
