Mr.  Meister  reports  on  the  Year  2000  problem  from  the  perspective  of
German  banking  supervisors      Luncheon  speech  by  Mr.  Edgar  Meister,  a  member  of  the
Directorate of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at  the  Year  2000  meeting  of  European  central  banks
and financial regulators organised by the Joint Year 2000 Council and the Deutsche Bundesbank
in Frankfurt/Main on 30/10/98.
I
I  am  pleased  to  contribute  to  this  conference  on  the  Year  2000  and  how  the
millennium date change poses a very significant risk for financial institutions and markets.
The  media  have  now  been  reporting  regularly,  and  sometimes  with  flashy
headlines, on the many problems which the Y2K problem or “millennium bug” can pose to the
economy and public administration. One has visions of planes crashing, assembly lines coming
to a standstill, pensioners being asked to register for school, babies receiving old age pensions,
contracts becoming null and void, or deliveries being interrupted.
We are all well aware that the Year 2000 problem impacts on the whole economy
and  the  public  administration.  Therefore,  joint  action  must  be  taken  now  if  we  are  to  avoid
potentially serious problems down the road.
Acting in my role as a central banker and as chairman of the Banking Supervision
Committee  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  my  primary  concern  is  on  the  role  financial
institutions play in this context. That is why I want to take this opportunity to give you a short
overview on the implications of the problem on the financial sector and a brief summary of the
measures  taken  by  German  banking  supervisors  to  promote  and  intensify  the  necessary  Year
2000 preparations.
II
In  the  banking  and  insurance  sectors,  the  impact  of  systems  being  insufficiently
Year  2000  compliant  can  be  particularly  drastic.  Some  vivid  examples  are  the  possibility  of
interest and redemption payments on loans being calculated inaccurately, statements of accounts
and  insurance  periods  being  updated  incorrectly,  cheques  and  credit  cards  being  rejected  by
ATMs (automated teller machines), and futures contracts being cancelled.
However,  the  more  pressing  risks  are  to  be  found  in  the  danger  that  payment
systems  might  collapse,  liquidity  bottlenecks  might  occur,  and  the  number  of  credit  defaults
might increase, owing to Year 2000 problems on the part of banks’ customers. For this reason,
banking supervisors have alerted the banking industry to the possibility of significant changes in
customers’ behaviour occurring at the end of 1999 as far as their demand for cash goes. A lack of
public  confidence  in  the  ability  of  the  financial  sector  to  solve  the  Year  2000  problem  could
trigger increased withdrawals of deposits and demand for cash.
The particularly close technical and financial interdependency within the banking
sector,  as  well  as  with  all  sectors  of  the  economy  (owing  to  the  banks’  corporate  customers),
makes  it  necessary  to  take  particularly  comprehensive  action.  Not  only  must  the  banks’  own
systems be reassessed but also the Year 2000 preparations being made by their business partners.
There  is  a  further  factor  that  compounds  the  situation:  Germany  and  the  other
member states of the forthcoming European Monetary Union must deal with the dual challenge
of preparing their computer programs for the changeover to the single European currency and at
BIS Review   93/1998
- 2 -
the same time take the necessary preparations for the century date change. Numerous parallels
show up here, and what we nowadays call “synergy effects” are the result. They will surely be
limited, yet they do clearly exist, such as in cashless payments.
For  one  thing,  there  is  a  heightened  awareness  of  how  to  handle  such  cross-
country  and  cross-system  conversion  processes,  for  which  there  is  hardly  any  historical
precedent.  For  another,  completely  new  procedures  such  as  the  cross-border  TARGET  system
have been developed. In these systems, it was possible to take timely account of the changeover
to the Year 2000, which will take place in 427 days. The absolute necessity of preparing these
systems  anew  for  the  euro  has  allowed  the  Bundesbank  and  the  credit  institutions  to
simultaneously  make  virtually  countless  EDP  systems  in  the  accounting  sections  and  “back
offices” Year 2000 compliant.
The  practical  experience  which  must  almost  inevitably  be  gained  during  the
weekend of the changeover to the euro from 1998 to 1999 will also provide welcome knowledge
that can be used for the century date change. It will probably once again become clear to all those
involved that the interplay of different systems can be different in real life than in a test scenario,
however realistic it may be. The Year 2000 changeover has a different type of complexity than
the  introduction  of  the  euro,  since  there  is  an  interaction  between  different  EDP  applications,
system  components  and  external  software  components,  as  well  as  processor-driven  systems.
Substituting  the  euro  for  the  DM  will  involve  the  organisation  of  workflows  and  operating
procedures; in computer-related terms, that means new software must be installed. However, in
the  changeover  from  December  31,  1999  to  January  1,  2000,  the  hardware  components  of  the
EDP systems, i.e. the nearly innumerable number of chips, must be transformed.
The Bundesbank and the credit institutions, which were already required to play a
pioneering role when the euro was introduced, are again forced to play a key role in getting the
financial sector ready for the millennium date change. Responsibility for the overall coordination
of the exchange of information and ideas on this problem among the various sectors of industry,
though, is in the hands the Federal Government. (To this end, the Federal Ministry of Economics
has set up, among other things, a Year 2000 expert group in its ministry, in which representatives
of the most important sectors of industry and administration affected by the problem are actively
participating.)
III
What measures are German banking supervisors taking to help the financial sector
achieve a successful crossover to the new millennium?
German banking supervisors do not and cannot even dare to guarantee that banks
will be fully compliant; rather the emphasis is on ensuring that
   banks’ senior management have focused on the scale of the problems facing
their institution,
they are taking responsibility for solving them,
the banks systematically plan the relevant projects and implement them in a
timely manner, and
they  have  contingency  plans  in  place  to  rectify  any  slippage  or  system
failure.
Since the beginning of their Year 2000 activities in 1994-95, and particularly since
1997,  the  Bundesbank  and  the  Federal  Banking  Supervisory  Office  have  been  leaning  on  the
BIS Review   93/1998
- 3 -
banking industry to press ahead with its Year 2000 preparations with great intensity. Therefore
the state of the banking industry’s preparations for the Year 2000 is also a major focal point of
ongoing banking supervision.
On-site  validation  procedures  through  independent  auditors  during  audits  of  the
banks’ annual accounts for as early as the year 1997 constitute one important point. Another very
important  action  is  a  Year  2000  survey  conducted  in  June  1998.  The  Federal  Banking
Supervisory  Office  and  the  Bundesbank  asked  all  the  approximately  3,600  credit  institutions
under  supervision  and  200  stockbrokers  in  Germany  about  their  Year  2000  preparations.  The
analysis of the preparations is supplemented by personal discussions of banking supervisors with
individual  credit  institutions,  particularly  those  having  branches  and  subsidiaries  abroad.
Immediate  actions  are  taken  where  the  existence  of  the  institution  is  in  jeopardy  owing  to
insufficient preparations for the Year 2000.
With regard to the timetable, German banking supervisors have not set any official
target  dates,  yet  they  have  made  it  perfectly  clear  in  discussions  and  surveys  that  the  external
testing of these systems should be completed by mid-1999. This target date will also be used for
the final prudential assessment of the state of preparations of individual credit institutions.
Although  legal  problems,  particularly  liability  issues,  are  being  given  increased
attention in connection with the Year 2000 problem, no legislative changes are currently being
envisaged, because the legal system is flexible enough to cope with these problems.
Ladies and gentlemen, the turning of the clock at midnight on December 31, 1999
cannot  be  postponed  -  as  you  all  know.  Time  is  a  scarce  asset  with  regard  to  the  necessary
preparations. As all credit institutions are depending on each other to be sufficiently prepared, the
issue  is  hardly  a  factor  of  competition.  On  the  contrary,  an  exchange  of  experience  and
information is crucial in order to enhance the efficiency of the changeover work. Therefore, the
Federal Banking Supervisory Office and the Deutsche Bundesbank have been playing a proactive
role in coordinating the efforts across the financial institutions: at their instigation, the Central
Credit  Committee  (ZKA)  established  a  forum  comprising  several  banking  associations  for
exchanging  experience  on  the  Year  2000  problem  at  the  expert  level.  The  Federal  Banking
Supervisory Office and the Deutsche Bundesbank are involved in the forum’s work.
Supporting  the  banking  industry  in  its  efforts  to  solve  the  Y2K  problem  is  an
ongoing process that will continue until the crossover takes place. Nevertheless, I must reiterate
that  the  ultimate  responsibility  lies  with  the  management  of  the  individual  institutions
themselves.  This  is  why  handling  the  Year  2000  problem  responsibly  is  a  criterion  for  the
Federal  Banking  Supervisory  Office  when  assessing  whether  or  not  banking  business  is  being
conducted properly.
IV
I could go on and on about the supervisory aspects of the Y2K problem. However,
a luncheon speech does not seem to be the appropriate setting to go into too much detail.
Furthermore,  when  I  look  at  the  impressive  programme  of  this  conference,  it
seems to me that all the important elements of this topic will be covered by this morning’s and
afternoon’s panels.
BIS Review   93/1998
- 4 -
However,  looking  at  a  lunch  as  a  social  event,  one  aspect  of  the  Y2K  problem
comes to my mind that is not covered by today’s programme and that might be worth bringing to
your attention - if nothing else, at least as a potential problem in the course of the century date
change that deserves thought. Let me call it the social aspect of the Y2K problem.
New Year’s Eve 1999/2000 will be a social event of major proportions, according
to some people even an event of biblical significance. Millions of people will drive either to one
of many organised New Year’s parties or to pay a visit to relatives or friends in order to celebrate
the new millennium. Are you aware of the fact that there are about 30 different data-dependent
embedded chips in a modern-day automobile?
Getting  to  the  parties  before  midnight  should  not  be  a  big  problem.  However,
imagine what will happen to the mood of the parties if cars stop working after the millennium
date changes, which would mean the parties would have to continue, but the second and  third
glasses  of  champagne  would  only  be  lukewarm  at  best  because  all  the  refrigerators  are  out  of
order?
V
However, looking at some  humorous side effects of the problem does not make it
any less serious for society in general. Looking at the international banking system as a whole, I
believe  that  we  have  already  made  considerable  headway  in  limiting  the  possibility  that  Y2K
disruptions will have systemic consequences for our markets. However, we must all continue to
work hard in the time remaining to ensure that the existing threat can be averted to the greatest
possible extent.
In  that  spirit,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  I  would  like  to  conclude  my  remarks  and
commend  the  Joint  Year  2000  Council  for  organising  such  regional  conferences.  They  take
account of the fact that in a globalised economy, a worldwide effort is necessary to successfully
face the challenges of the Year 2000 computer problem.
BIS Review   93/1998
