Mr. Duisenberg looks at the international role of the euro and the ESCB’s monetary policy
Statement  by  the  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  Dr.  Willem  F.  Duisenberg,  at  the
Frankfurt European Banking Congress in Frankfurt am Main on 20/11/98.
I very much welcome the opportunity today to share some thoughts with you on the issue of the
international role of the euro and the monetary policy strategy of the European System of Central
Banks (ESCB). In order to remain within the tight time frame and leave room for discussion, I
shall try to be as concise as possible, and I shall therefore focus on the three questions addressed
to me directly.
1. Is a significant international role for the euro a desirable goal?
Some  observers  have  asserted  that  one  of  the  main  motives  behind  Economic  and  Monetary
Union in Europe is the creation of a major international role for the euro, and that fostering such
a role would be an important objective for the European Central Bank (ECB). Both assertions are
incorrect.  The  purpose  of  the  introduction  of  the  euro  is  to  promote  economic  integration  and
economic welfare in the Member States, and the objective of the ESCB – and of the ECB as part
of this system – is to maintain price stability within the euro area. The ESCB will take a neutral
stance towards an international role of the euro. It will neither hinder nor deliberately encourage
the development of this role, but will rather leave this to market forces.
The  ESCB  will,  however,  contribute  indirectly  to  the  international  recognition  of  the  euro  by
achieving its objective of maintaining price stability within the euro area. A successful monetary
policy is a necessary condition, but not the only prerequisite for the international recognition and
use of a currency. The reason is that the latter is a complex phenomenon. While there is no single
international role for a currency, there are many uses for a currency in an international context.
On the official side, they include the use of a currency as an anchor for exchange rate pegs, as a
means of storing foreign exchange reserves, and as a vehicle for foreign exchange interventions.
On  the  private  side,  they  include  the  use  as  a  quotation  and  vehicle  currency  for  international
trade,  as  a  currency  of  denomination  for  financial  assets,  and  as  a  substitute  currency  in
circulation abroad. The significance of all these roles depends on the decisions of a large number
of economic agents – including governments, central banks, institutional and private investors,
corporations, and traders – which the central bank can only influence to a limited extent.
While  it  is  difficult  and  not  always  meaningful  to  make  predictions  about  the  overall
international  role  of  the  euro,  it  seems  safe  to  assert  that  it  will  be  significant  in  a  number  of
areas.
First, there  are  what  one  might  call  the  ‘static’  effects  stemming  from  the  changeover  and  the
conversion of existing financial assets and liabilities into euro. That alone will already give the
euro  an  internationally  recognised  role,  since  the  euro  area  currencies,  in  general,  and  the
Deutsche Mark, in particular, have played a significant role as anchor, reserve, investment and
vehicle currencies in the past.
Second, and potentially even more important, there will be ‘dynamic’ effects stemming from new
assets and liabilities acquired or issued in euro. Here, the creation of a large and liquid, integrated
capital market will be the most important element in fostering  such  a  development.  For  short-
term  instruments,  there  will  be  a  broad  and  liquid  European  money  market  with  a  common
overnight  rate  and  very  similar  short-term  interest  rates  for  comparable  instruments.  At  the
longer  end  of  the  maturity  spectrum,  market  integration  will  be  jump-started  by  the  re-
BIS Review   99/1998
- 2 -
denomination of outstanding government debt in euro on 1 January 1999. The elimination of the
currency  fragmentation  in  the  European  bond  markets  will  also  lead  to  the  development  of
uniform market standards and the creation of a large and liquid market for portfolio investors.
2. How will the euro’s international role influence the ECB’s monetary policy?
Having  an  international  currency  has  significant  advantages  for  businesses  and  consumers.  It
may, however, sometimes complicate the conduct of monetary policy. In the ESCB’s monetary
policy  strategy,  developments  in  monetary  aggregates  play  a  prominent  role,  and  these
developments will  be  analysed  very  carefully.  If  a  significant  part  of  the  money  stock  were  to
circulate outside the euro area and if its development were to deviate from that circulating inside
the euro area, this could be a source of instability in money demand.
But this is only one of the challenges which the ESCB will be facing in analysing developments
in monetary aggregates. Other challenges are related to changes in money demand as a result of
the introduction of the euro itself. Together, these changes represent a structural break, and it is
obviously difficult to predict how demand for money will evolve around such a break.
The ESCB has taken these difficulties into account in its monetary policy strategy in that, firstly,
it  will  announce  only  a  reference  value  for  a  monetary  aggregate,  and  not  a  target  value.  This
means  that,  although  monetary  developments  will  be  used  as  the  main  indicator  of  potential
inflationary or disinflationary pressures, the ESCB will not react in an almost mechanical way to
correct deviations from the reference value in the short term. Secondly, the ESCB will not focus
solely on the analysis of monetary aggregates, but will complement this analysis with a broadly
based assessment of the outlook for future price developments.
On the one hand, the chosen strategy will, in my view, ensure as great a degree of continuity as
possible in relation to the existing strategies of national central banks in the euro area. On the
other hand, due consideration has simultaneously been given to the unique situation created by
the transition to Monetary Union, in which a possibly growing international role of the euro is
but one element.
3. What are the prospects for international policy co-ordination between central banks? Are target zones
for the key currencies conceivable, or even desirable?
The ECB, acting on behalf of the ESCB, is already beginning to play a major role in international
fora, such as those at the Bank for International Settlements (BIS), the OECD and in a G7 and
G10  context,  and  I  expect  this  role  to  grow  considerably  in  significance  once  the  ESCB  is
operational. In all fora, the ECB's role will be to contribute to the international policy discussions
from the perspective that price stability in the euro area is its prime objective. At the same time,
the ECB will seek to make the best contribution it can to stable international developments. In
particular,  the  introduction  of  the  euro  will  reduce  the  number  of  major  currency  blocs  in  the
global  financial  system.  In  principle,  this  should  simplify  the  exchange  of  views  on  financial
issues at the global level. Each of the main partners – the United States, the euro area and Japan –
will  be  in  a  position  to  speak  for  a  comparatively  large  economic  area  and  will  be  similarly
vulnerable to possible consequences of instability. They may thus have a greater incentive to take
on a share of the responsibility for helping to maintain a stable global environment.
On  the  question  of  exchange  rates  and  target  zones,  I  would  like  to  state  clearly  that,  in  its
monetary strategy, the ESCB does not have an exchange rate target. Nor do the United States and
Japan. An exchange rate target for an area as large and relatively closed as that of the euro area
could  easily  conflict  with  the  maintenance  of  price  stability  and  could,  therefore,  not  be
BIS Review   99/1998
- 3 -
sustainable. According to our monetary policy strategy, the exchange rate of the euro will thus be
an outcome, rather than the objective, both of the economic, monetary and other policies pursued
in the euro area, and of cyclical developments in the euro area and abroad. It will be monitored as
one of the indicators of monetary policy and as a source of potential changes in the price level in
the euro area. However, the exchange rate will play a far smaller role in the euro area than it has
played in the Member States in the past.
In line with the ESCB’s approach to the euro exchange rate, the Ministers of Finance, who are
ultimately  responsible  for  the  exchange  rate  policy  of  the  euro,  have  agreed  to  issue  so-called
exchange  rate  orientations  only  in  exceptional  circumstances,  such  as  in  the  case  of  clear  and
persistent misalignments of the euro. This is apparently not the case at this juncture. Nor is there
any indication that such misalignments will be unavoidable in the future. In particular, the fact
that our strategy does not include any exchange rate target vis-à-vis the US dollar does not imply
that the euro/dollar rate will be unstable or volatile, or that the ESCB is against reasonably stable
exchange rates. The pursuit of stability-oriented monetary and budgetary policies on both sides of
the Atlantic would put in place one of the major prerequisites for a reasonably stable euro/dollar
exchange rate. At the current juncture, the policy framework in both regions seems to bode well
for  the  adoption  of  such  policies.  Absolute  stability  is,  of  course,  impossible  to  guarantee  and
would not even be desirable, if the United States and the euro area were to go through business
cycles which are not fully synchronised.
BIS Review   99/1998
