Bank of Japan’s monthly report of recent economic and financial developments1
Bank of Japan, Communication, 17/12/98.
The Bank’s View2
The economic deterioration in Japan has moderated somewhat, mainly as a result of the increase
in public investment.
With  respect  to  final  demand,  business  fixed  investment  has  been  declining  significantly,  and
housing  investment  continues  to  be  sluggish.  Private  consumption,  as  a  whole,  shows  some
weakness. Meanwhile, net exports (exports minus imports) are basically on an upward trend, and
public  investment  has  started  to  increase  considerably.  Reflecting  this  development  of  final
demand and some progress in inventory adjustments, especially  in  those  of  durable  goods,  the
decline in production has been slowing.
Corporate profits continue  to  worsen,  and  employment  and  household  income  conditions  have
deteriorated  as  the  ratio  of  job  offers  to  applications  has  recorded  a  historical  low  and  winter
bonuses  are  expected  to  decrease.  Financial  conditions  are  improving  in  some  firms  with  the
effects  of  the  policy  measures  taken  by  the  government  and  the  Bank.  Nonetheless,  firms
apparently  cannot  remove  their  anxiety  about  fund-raising  conditions.  Consequently,  corporate
and  household  sentiment  remains  cautious,  and  a  recovery  has  not  been  observed  in  private
demand.
With  the  implementation  of  the  government’s  comprehensive  economic  stimulus  package  and
recently  launched  emergency  economic  measures,  the  economy  is  likely  to  be  underpinned
mainly  by  public  investment  towards  [=  during?]the  first  half  of  fiscal  1999.  Furthermore,  the
Bank’s monetary and financial measures and the government’s measures to alleviate the credit
crunch are expected to take effect gradually. Nevertheless, an immediate self-sustained recovery
in  private  demand  is  hardly  expected  since  corporate  profits  and  household  income  are
deteriorating and the constraints from corporate finance are likely to persist for some time, owing
to cautious lending attitudes of private banks. Moreover, attention should be paid to the effects of
the  appreciation  of  the  yen  since  early  autumn  and  the  uncertainty  in  financial  and  economic
developments abroad. To lead Japan’s economy into a steady recovery, it is important to prepare
an environment where firms and households can regain confidence in Japan’s economic future
by, for instance, promptly restoring the stability of the financial system.
With  regard  to  prices,  reflecting  the  expansion  in  the  output  gap,  wholesale  prices  are  on  a
downtrend, and corporate service prices are weakening. Consumer prices have increased slightly
above the previous year’s level, owing to the rise in prices of perishables. Excluding this effect,
however,  consumer  prices  basically  continue  to  be  weak.  As  for  the  outlook,  the  economic
deterioration  is  likely  to  moderate,  mainly  as  a  result  of  the  increase  in  public  investment.
Nonetheless, distinct narrowing in the output gap is hardly expected for the time being as private
demand remains sluggish. Furthermore, the continued decline in wages and the appreciation of
the yen since early autumn are likely to exert downward pressure on prices. Hence, the decline in
prices, especially in wholesale prices, may somewhat accelerate in the future.
                                                     
1  This  report  was  written  based  on  data  and  information  available  when  the  Bank  of  Japan  Monetary  Policy
Meeting was held on December 15, 1998.
2  The  Bank’s  view  on  recent  economic  and  financial  developments,  determined  by  the  Policy  Board  at  the
Monetary Policy Meeting held on December 15, as the basis of monetary policy decisions.
BIS Review   107/1998
- 2 -
Turning to the financial markets, Japanese banks are successfully raising foreign currency funds
necessary to cover a huge shortage at the year-end. Reflecting this, the Japan premium and Euro-
yen  rates  have  peaked  out,  and  the  market’s  anxiety,  which  had  previously  intensified,  is
gradually settling down. In the meantime, market interest rates on instruments maturing after the
fiscal year-end (March 1999) are on an upward trend, suggesting  continued  concern  of  market
participants over liquidity risk.
Yields  on  long-term  government  bonds  have  rebounded  since  late  November.  Although  stock
prices  considerably  recovered  after  hitting  the  recent  bottom  in  October,  they  have  recently
softened  again.  The  yield  spread  (the  government  bond  yield  minus  the  expected  earnings  on
stocks) remains extremely small or negative, reflecting market participants’ continued cautious
outlook on the future of the economy.
With regard to corporate finance, firms are further seeking to secure ample on-hand liquidity in
fear of more difficulties in raising funds, especially toward the end of this fiscal year when the
large-scale redemption of corporate bonds is scheduled. Meanwhile, private banks are continuing
their cautious lending stance.
In these circumstances, various policy measures seem to have prevented serious credit shrinkage:
the enhancement of [the ?]credit guarantee system[s ?] contributed to a recent increase in loans
to small and medium-sized firms; and the Bank announced the introduction of new measures, in
addition  to  the  continued  ample  supply  of  funds,  to  facilitate  firms’  financing  activities.
Fundamentally,  however,  firms  are  still  under  severe  fund-raising  conditions.  How  corporate
financing  conditions  towards  the  year-end  and  the  fiscal  year-end  develop,  and  how  such
developments influence business activities and the whole economy, continues to warrant careful
monitoring.
BIS Review   107/1998
