Mr.  Stals  discusses  the  importance  of  credit  extension  for  macroeconomic
financial  stability      Address  by  the  Governor  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank,  Dr.  Chris
Stals, at a Breakfast Meeting of the Institute of Credit Management in Johannesburg on 29/10/98.
1. A “credit” economy
Modern economies are often described as “credit-based” economies. This is a true
reflection  of  the  functioning  of  modern,  sophisticated  economies  in  which  money  plays  the
important part as a means of exchange, as an instrument of payments and as a store of value.
The  availability  and  the  use  of  credit  facilitates  the  exchange  of  goods  and
services,  the  production  processes  and  the  growing  importance  in  all  modern  economies  of
financial services. One can hardly visualize a modern economy that works without credit.
The normal characteristic of credit is that one participant in the economy, be it an
individual, a corporate body or a governmental institution, denies himself the immediate use of
purchasing  power  already  in  his  possession,  and  makes  this  purchasing  power  on  a  temporary
basis available to another participant in the economy who has an immediate need for the use of
the  purchasing  power.  This  kind  of  transfer  of  purchasing  power  from  savers  (the  lenders)  to
users (borrowers) will never create macroeconomic distortions in the economy. On the contrary,
as already mentioned, it supports maximum economic growth and development in the country.
This basic form of credit extension encouraged the development over many years
of financial savings institutions, financial intermediaries, institutional investors, fund managers,
etc. that serve as useful conduits for transferring purchasing power from savers to users, either
for  consumption  or  for  real  or  financial  investment  purposes.  The  financial  authorities  in  all
countries have a responsibility to oversee these financial institutions, mainly with the intention of
protecting the general public, be they lenders or borrowers, against exploitation that may lead to
an  unreasonably  low  remuneration  for  savers,  exorbitantly  high  costs  for  borrowers  and/or
financial losses for both.
Together  with  the  development  of  these  specialised  financial  intermediaries
financial markets emerged where the transfer of savings from lenders to borrowers can take place
in  a  more  competitive  environment  with  greater  transparency  and  more  general  participation.
These  markets,  such  as  the  stock  exchanges,  bond  markets,  markets  for  derivatives  and
short-term  money  markets  play  a  very  important  part  in  the  optimum  allocation  of  scarce
resources in modern economies. Financial  authorities  also  have  a  vested  interest  in  overseeing
these financial markets to ensure orderly conditions, the effective and efficient transfer of funds
from borrowers to lenders and the maintenance of orderly and stable conditions in the markets.
A  further  development  in  this  process  of  the  transfer  of  purchasing  power  from
savers  to  users  of  funds,  took  place  with  the  development  of  cross-border  or  international
transfers  of  purchasing  power.  Savers  in  the  more  mature  economies  of  the  world  where  the
demand for purchasing power is relatively low, found it increasingly attractive to make loans to
the  less-developed  economies  where  they  could  earn  much  higher  interest  rates.  These
cross-border movement of funds introduced a new dimension in the credit extension process, in
the form of exchange rates for foreign currency transfers. The financial authorities of individual
countries  now  obtained  more  than  just  an  overseeing  function  in  the  credit  extension  process.
Rightly  or  wrongly,  governments  were  in  the  past  seen  to  be  responsible  for  the  fixing  of  the
BIS Review   91/1998
- 2 -
exchange  rate,  and  for  ensuring  that  convertibility  of  national  currencies  into  other  currencies
will at all times be possible.
There is one further form of credit extension that has become of vital importance
for  macroeconomic  financial  management,  and  that  is  the  extension  of  bank  credit  that
simultaneously  also  creates  money.  Banks  are  not  normal  financial  intermediaries  that  accept
funds from savers and then make loans out of these funds to borrowers. Banks can create money
to make loans, and in the process can increase the total purchasing power in the economy.
In  summary,  therefore,  the  presence  of  credit  facilities,  financed  out  of  normal
savings, is an essential and necessary element of all modern economies. The financial authorities
should have no more than an overseeing function in the management, organisation and internal
administration of the whole process of credit extension. As far as both financial intermediaries
and  financial  markets  are  concerned,  the  authorities  should  restrict  their  intervention  to  the
creation of a protective and transparent legal and accounting framework within which institutions
and markets can function effectively.
However,  the  financial  authorities  have  more  than  just  an  overseeing  function
when  it  comes  to  international  credit  extension  activities,  and  to  the  creation  of  money  by
banking institutions.
2. Bank credit extension
Excessive bank credit extension lay behind many of the global financial problems
of recent times. In a number of the East Asian countries, controls on banking institutions were
rather  lax  and  enabled  them  to  increase  their  total  credit  to  governments  and  private  sector
borrowers by substantial amounts over a protracted period of time. In the process, interest rates
were  kept  artificially  low  and  banks  on  an  increasing  scale  relied  on  foreign  borrowings  to
supplement their liquidity base for the continuing expansion of total credit.
In  the  end,  when  foreign  investors  became  reluctant  to  continue  to  provide  the
liquidity base for the credit extension by the banks, the financial systems crumbled. In summary,
the final collapse was forced by:
•  A  withdrawal  of  foreign  deposits  from  banks  and  of  foreign  portfolio
investments from the capital markets of the affected countries.
•  Foreign credit previously extended to the East Asian countries was therefore
withdrawn.
•  A reduction in the amount of liquidity available within banking institutions as
they lost foreign deposits and had to fund the withdrawal of other investments
from the capital markets.
•  Forced  reductions  in  the  amount  of  credit  banking  institutions  could  make
available  to  their  clients,  many  of  whom  were  overborrowed  and  could  not
meet the demand for the repayment of loans.
•  An unavoidable depreciation of exchange rates and sharp rises in interest rates
which  forced 
losses  on  borrowers  of  foreign  and  domestic  funds.
Overborrowed  institutions  were  forced  into  liquidation,  and  in  the  process
transferred their losses to their lenders.
BIS Review  91/1998
- 3 -
The consequences of this credit crunch are now well-known. In many of the East
Asian  countries,  negative  real  economic  growth  rates  are  now  experienced  as  painful
consolidations and reforms of banking and financial structures are taking place.
The East Asian financial crisis, which quickly spread to other emerging markets,
to the smaller more stable developed economies of the world and recently also to major financial
centres such as New York provided a stark reminder of how important sound credit management
is  for  the  protection  of  macroeconomic  financial  stability  in  individual  countries,  and  in  the
world at large.
No  country  can  procure  permanent  and  sustainable  economic  growth  at  a  high
level if this growth is dependent on the creation of an increasing amount of credit, extended by
banking  institutions.  Not  only  lenders  (banking  institutions)  and  borrowers  (private  sector
institutions and individuals) can be destroyed in the process, but also total financial systems and
even total economies can break down under the burden of too much credit.
Central  banks  have  the  unenviable  task  of  judging  at  all  times  what  amount  of
additional  bank  credit  will  in  prevailing  circumstances  be  reconcilable  with  the  objective  of
maintaining  overall  financial  stability.  Economies  normally  provide  early  warning  signals  of
excessive credit extension, such as rising inflation or unaffordable  increases  in  imports,  or  the
withdrawal of foreign funds from the country. It is important not to ignore such signals.
3. Other lessons from the global financial crisis
The  recent  turmoil  in  world  financial  markets  provided  important  lessons,  not
only for central bankers, but also for credit managers in private sector financial institutions. The
following  three  lessons  must  have  come  to  the  notice  of  many  a  private  sector  financial
institution:
(i)  Risk  management  models  based  on  past  experience  or  on  rigid  computer
programmes  do  not  necessarily  provide  adequate  protection  against  potential
losses  in  the  new  environment  of  financial  globalisation.  Experience  and
discretion cannot be replaced by models and machines.
(ii) The value of collateral against credit extension can disappear overnight (vide
the Russian example).
(iii)  Excessive  leveraging  must  be  avoided  at  all  times,  and  particularly  in  the
present  environment  of  volatile  global  changes  (vide  the  example  of  the
Long-Term Capital Management Fund).
Governments,  central  banks,  market  managers,  private  sector  institutions  and
private  individuals  all  have  learned  once  again  from  this  experience  that  the  excessive  use  of
credit sooner or later leads to disaster. At this juncture, the world economy is paying a high price
in the form of depressed growth for being reminded of these basic truths.
4. Credit extension and the South African economy
Although  the  South  African  economy  was  also  severely  affected  by  the  current
world financial crisis, a sound banking system, well-managed financial institutions and effective
financial  markets  protected  the  country  against  the  almost  total  collapse  of  the  economy,  as
happened in a few other countries.
BIS Review   91/1998
- 4 -
The Reserve Bank has some concern, nevertheless, for the increasing use of bank
credit to maintain expenditure levels. The recent financial crisis forced exorbitantly high interest
rates on the South African economy and borrowers of funds could not avoid sharp rises in the
cost of servicing existing debts. The world financial crisis therefore hopefully also served as a
grim warning to all South African borrowers and lenders that excessive debt positions should be
avoided.  Neither  the  Reserve  Bank  nor  the  Government  can  guarantee  low  interest  rates  or
overall  financial  protection  in  the  new  environment  of  a  worldwide  integration  of  financial
markets.
It will also be foolish for South Africa now to try to revive the domestic economy
by creating an excessive amount of additional credit extended by banking institutions in a fragile
global financial environment. Such a policy could easily lead South Africa also on the path of
overall economic disaster, as more than one country in the rest of the world experienced over the
past year.
5. Conclusion
I  believe  that  members  of  this  Institute  of  Credit  Management  are  aware  of  the
potent  danger  of  excessive  debt  positions,  be  it  for  countries,  governments  or  private  sector
borrowers. The discipline of controlling this dangerous element of modern, sophisticated market
economies,  is  not  a  responsibility  only  of  the  central  bank.  It  is  not  only  a  problem  of
macroeconomic  policy,  but  also  one  for  institutions  operating  at  the  micro-level.  We  can  all
make  a  contribution  towards  protecting  our  country  from  falling  in  the  debt  trap  of  excessive
borrowing by applying sound principles in the management of our debt positions.
BIS Review  91/1998
