Mr.  Duisenberg  speaks  on  changes  in  European  financial  systems  and  the
contributions of the ECB   Remarks delivered by the President of the European Central Bank,
Dr. W. F.  Duisenberg,  at  a  conference  on  “Monnaie  unique  et  fiscalité  de  l’épargne:  quelle
Europe financière?” organised by the European Parliament in Brussels on 23/9/98.
1. Introduction
I  would  like  to  express  my  appreciation  for  the  interesting  exchange  of  views
which  has  taken  place  during  this  round  table.  As  was  made  clear  during  the  discussion,  the
structure of financial systems in Europe will evolve as the single currency is created. The ECB
has already contributed to this evolution in many ways and will continue to do so in the future. I
would like to make a few remarks on this topic.
2. Changes in European financial systems
European financial systems are evolving within a global environment, which has
become more liberalised, international and concentrated. Changes of particular importance in the
euro area include technological innovation in payment  systems,  the  supply  and  trading  of  new
derivative  products,  and  the  improvement  and  diffusion  of  new  risk  management  techniques.
Moreover, the environment of European financial systems is characterised by the Single Market,
with new harmonised pieces of regulation and practices developed on the basis of, notably, the
Banking  Co-ordination  Directives,  the  Capital  Adequacy  Directives  and,  importantly  in  the
context of this Conference, the Investment Services Directive.
The scope and organisation of financial activities in the euro area will also change
as a result of the creation of the euro. First, money markets are going to be unified. Second, the
focus of foreign exchange activities will of course shift to currencies outside the euro area. Third,
the behaviour of participants in equity and bond markets is likely to be driven less by country-
specific  considerations  and  more  by  precise,  sector-specific  or  issuer-specific  considerations.
This  latter  development  is  what  some  commentators  have  called  the  development  of  a  “credit
risk  culture”.  This  development  is  likely  to  improve  the  effectiveness  of  price  formation  on
European bond and equity markets. This, in due time, will contribute to the smooth functioning
of the financing of the euro area economy, as savings are likely to be channelled more efficiently
and  swiftly  through  the  economy.  As  such,  the  development  of  a  “credit  risk  culture”  will
therefore be a welcome product of European Monetary Union.
3. Contributions of the ECB
Let me now turn to the contributions that the European Central Bank has made,
and will continue to make, to support the efficient working of financial markets in the euro area.
Price stability
The first and foremost contribution that the ECB aims to make is price stability.
The  European  System  of  Central  Banks  will  pursue  its  primary  objective  of  maintaining  price
stability with determination. This should facilitate the formation of price expectations by market
participants and contribute to financial stability in general.
BIS Review   77/1998
- 2 -
This  environment  will  be  beneficial  to  the  efficiency  of  savings  allocation
amongst the various sectors of the economy of the euro area. There are several reasons for this.
First,  the  achievement  of  price  stability  should  help  to  reduce  the  uncertainty  relating  to  the
future path of inflation. This should enhance the information content of real and financial asset
prices  and  improve  the  capacity  of  economic  agents  to  select  investment  options  efficiently.
Second,  price  stability  will  contribute  to  protecting  the  value  of  savings,  thereby  avoiding  the
undesirable  wealth  re-distribution  effects  that  inflation  may  cause.  Third,  in  the  long  run,
increased financial stability may contribute to reducing the likelihood of occurrence of asset price
bubbles.
Payment systems
A  second  contribution  of  the  ECB  relates  to  the  field  of  payment  systems.  The
EMI, and now the ECB, have developed the TARGET system, which will be made available to
market  participants  as  from  4  January  1999.  The  system  will  ensure  the  unification  of  money
markets in the euro area. It will reduce transaction costs for cross-border payments and greatly
enhance security with regards to settlement risks and possible payment gridlocks.
The ECB has also prepared, and is about to publish, a set of minimum standards
which securities settlement systems should fulfil in order to be used in ESCB credit operations.
This publication and other initiatives taken by the ECB have fostered the increased co-operation
between securities settlement systems and depositories of the euro area.
Market rules and practices
A  third  contribution  of  the  ECB  relates  to  market  rules  and  practices.  Many
commentators have recognised that European Monetary Union will contribute to the furthering of
the  harmonisation  of  market  rules  and  practices.  In  accordance  with  the  mandates  given  by
treaties and statutes, the European Monetary Institute has taken, and now the European Central
Bank takes, an active role in the promotion of adequate new market conventions and rules for the
euro area, bearing in mind the principles of free competition.
Monetary policy framework of the ECB
Finally,  financial  markets  will  need  to  take  into  account  the  monetary  policy
framework of the ECB. The monetary policy framework of the ECB has been built so as to be
very  efficient  for  transmitting  monetary  policy,  while  at  the  same  time  being  as  neutral  as
possible with regard to financial structure. The neutrality and, indeed, market-friendliness, of the
ECB’s framework is apparent in a variety of ways.
First,  neutrality  is  apparent  in  the  way  open  market  operations  are  conducted.
Almost all of the ECB’s open market operations  will  be  executed  through  tenders,  to  which  a
broad spectrum of counterparties may submit bids. This will be a transparent and fair process.
Fine tuning open market operations may also be conducted through tenders, the so-called “quick”
tenders. The ECB and the national central banks will aim at giving the opportunity to participate
in fine tuning operations to all counterparties having an appropriate track record of activity in the
money market, if necessary on a rotating basis.
Second, the consideration of neutrality has been a driving factor in the process of
establishment of the list of eligible assets. Eligible assets are the assets which counterparties have
BIS Review   77/1998
- 3 -
to post as guarantees for any credit received from the European System of Central Banks. The list
of  eligible  assets  comprises  a  wide  variety  of  assets,  which  have  been  selected  by  the  ECB
according to area-wide uniform criteria relating to their credit standing in the whole euro area. In
order  to  promote  a  certain  degree  of  continuity  at  the  start  of  the  Third  Stage  of  European
Monetary  Union,  a  sub-set  (the  so-called  tier  two  eligible  assets)  includes  assets  of  particular
importance  for  certain  national  banking  systems  of  the  euro  area.  These  assets  have  the  same
credit standing as the other assets.
For  monetary  policy  operations,  counterparties  will  be  able  to  use  any  eligible
assets, irrespective of where they are located in the euro area. To this end, national central banks
will act as correspondents for each other so as to make cross-border use possible also for assets
for which this service is not yet provided by securities settlement systems.
For the record, one may also mention the ECB’s system of risk control measures.
Risk control measures will ensure that the amount of assets provided is always sufficient. When
designing  its  system  of  risk  control  measures,  the  ECB  has  paid  careful  attention  to  the  best
market practices in this area.
Finally, and perhaps most importantly, the minimum reserve system of the ECB
has been developed so as to be as neutral as possible. The minimum reserve system has two main
objectives. The first objective is to stabilise money market interest rates. This will be achieved by
requesting  that  average  reserve  holdings  be  above  the  minimum  reserve  requirements  over
monthly periods of time. This will allow the banking system to absorb liquidity shocks easily.
The  volatility  of  money  market  rates  will,  as  a  consequence,  be  reduced.  Also,  fine  tuning
operations will not have to be used frequently, which will mean that markets are less affected by
central bank interventions than they would otherwise be. The second objective of the minimum
reserve system is to enlarge the demand for central bank money,  so  as  to  enlarge  the  liquidity
deficit  of  the  banking  system  vis-à-vis  the  European  System  of  Central  Banks.  This  will
safeguard the role of the European System of Central Banks as a key provider of liquidity to the
banking system.
In the minimum reserve system of the ECB, the reserve ratio will be rather small
and reserve requirements will be fully remunerated. The reserve ratio will be set at between 1.5%
and 2.5% and will be applied to the deposits, debt securities and money market paper issued by
credit  institutions,  except  for  residual  maturities  above  two  years.  Reserve  holdings  will  be
remunerated  up  to  the  required  reserve  level,  at  the  rate  of  the  ESCB’s  main  refinancing
operation (as averaged over a month).
It may be argued that a  less  than  full  remuneration  of  minimum  reserves  would
increase  the  interest  rate  elasticity  of  central  bank  money  demand.  This  notwithstanding,  the
European  Central  Bank  has  decided  in  favour  of  a  full  remuneration  of  minimum  reserves  in
order  to  avoid  the  potential  distortions  to  fair  and  efficient  markets  that  a  less  than  full
remuneration could have implied. As a result, the minimum reserve system is unlikely to lead to
any delocation of certain parts of the reserve base, hence of savings. Finally, it may also be useful
to note that the European Central Bank has also decided not to exempt any credit institution of
the euro area from the minimum reserve system.
4. Conclusion
BIS Review   77/1998
- 4 -
I am confident that the policy of the ECB has always been, and will continue to
be, guided by the principle of equal treatment, the desire to foster the development of financial
markets in the euro area and the need to avoid undue shifts in economic activity. This will also
contribute to providing an adequate environment for an efficient allocation of savings in the euro
area.
BIS Review   77/1998
