Mr. Yam focuses on how Hong Kong is coping with financial turmoil
Text  of  the  “Inside  Asia  Lecture  1998”  by  the  Chief  Executive  of  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary
Authority, Mr. Joseph Yam, JP, organised by The Australian, Sydney on 23/11/98.
Introduction
It  is  a  great  pleasure  to  be  in  your  beautiful  city  once  again,  and  an  honour  to  have  the
opportunity  to  speak  to  such  a  distinguished  audience.  Sydney  and  Hong  Kong  -  both  vibrant
international cities with spectacular ports - have much in common. We enjoy growing cultural
and economic links and, although some 4,500 miles distant, we are both part of the same region.
Less  happily,  our  economies  have  both  taken  a  hammering  from  the  financial  crisis  that  has
recently rocked the region. My focus in this talk will be on how the regional crisis has affected
Hong Kong, and, equally important, on the ways in which it has not affected Hong Kong.
The Asian Financial Crisis
The complex causes that so suddenly turned the Asian miracle into an Asian mess will no doubt
be debated for many years to come. The devastating effects of the massive exodus of capital from
the region have been clear enough. In the worst hit economies currencies have devalued by as
much  as  70%.  Stock  markets  have  declined  to  the  levels  of  ten  years  ago.  Asset  prices  have
sharply deflated, economies have contracted, and unemployment has risen. The region is going
through  its  worst  financial  crisis  since  the  Second  World  War.  Optimists  already  see  a
stabilization of the situation and light at the end of the tunnel, and they may well be right. But
deepening  recession  in  Japan,  emerging  problems  in  Latin  America,  and  questions  about  the
stability  of  the  U.S.  and  European  markets  still  raise  serious  concerns  that  what  began  as  a
regional crisis may swell into a crisis of global proportions.
Hong Kong is located at the very heart of the East Asian region, and our economy is intricately,
and increasingly, linked with the other economies in the region. It is therefore hardly surprising
that we should have experienced some considerable stress as a result of the Asian crisis. Over the
last  year  we  have  seen  a  roughly  50%  decline  in  the  value  of  property  and  stocks,  a  rise  in
unemployment,  and  a  forecast  contraction  of  4%  in  our  GDP  for  1998.  Although  the  stock
market and property prices have seen something of a rebound during the last month, the pain of
what has become an extensive economic adjustment continues, and is likely to continue for some
time.
It is necessary to stress, however, that this is an adjustment, not a collapse, and that it has been
one  of  the  least  dramatic,  and  least  traumatic,  of  all  the  upheavals  in  the  region.  In  US  dollar
terms, the Hang Seng Index has, since the crisis erupted last July, seen the smallest decline of
any  stock  market  in  the  region.  Our  banking  system  has  remained  stable  and  solvent.  Interest
rates have risen, but not as far as they have elsewhere: they are currently marginally higher than
US dollar interest rates at the short end and at a premium of about 100 basis points for 3-month
money.  Inflation  is  declining,  not  rising.  And,  where  other  currencies  have  seen  substantial
devaluations,  the  Hong  Kong  dollar  has  remained  stable.  In  fact,  it  remains  the  only  freely
convertible  currency  in  Asia  that  has  not  experienced  devaluation:  the  linked  exchange  rate  -
$7.8 Hong Kong dollars to the U.S. dollar - is as solid as ever. The tenacity and credibility of the
link is, in my view, one of the main reasons why Hong Kong has weathered the crisis better than
most of its neighbours. We are as committed as we have ever been to preserving the link, and we
have demonstrated, throughout the turmoil of the last year, that we have the machinery - in the
form of an effective currency board - to enable us to keep the link.
BIS Review   98/1998
- 2 -
We are also committed to maintaining our position as the world’s freest economy. Hong Kong
has built its reputation on free market principles. We are proud of this reputation, and we cherish
these  principles  because  we  know  how  much  our  prosperity  depends  on  them.  Whatever  uses
other economies might have for them, exchange controls are out of the question for Hong Kong:
the Basic Law, which sets out our basic principles of government, expressly prohibits them, and,
even if it did not, we know that, at least for Hong Kong, any attempt to introduce them, and to
turn inwards on ourselves, would spell the end of our prosperity.
But free market principles cannot mean markets that are left defenceless against manipulation.
One  troubling  aspect  of  the  Asian  crisis,  and  a  sign  of  larger  problems  in  the  world  financial
system, has been the extreme volatility in markets created by the rapid flows of highly leveraged
funds  around  the  world.  As  markets  in  the  region  became  more  vulnerable,  these  flows
increasingly took on a predatory character and became more and more subtle in their planning
and  sophistication.  This  August,  as  you  know,  the  Hong  Kong  financial  markets  became  the
target of a well planned attack by international hedge funds. We took unconventional actions to
fend off that attack and to fortify our financial system against future attacks. Not unexpectedly,
these  actions  have  been  the  cause  of  extensive  controversy,  and  of  a  great  deal  of
misunderstanding.  Let  me  attempt  to  present  the  issue  from  Hong  Kong’s  perspective  by
outlining what happened in August and explaining why we took action.
Oddly enough, Hong Kong became a target because of the transparency of its financial system:
we were singled out for our efficiency and predictability rather than for any fundamental flaws.
Under our rule-based currency board system, any change in the Hong Kong dollar monetary base
must be strictly matched, at the linked exchange rate, by a corresponding change in the amount
of foreign reserves held by the currency board. This is an autopilot mechanism, in which we in
the  HKMA  have  minimal  discretion:  the  currency  board  simply  acts  passively  in  response  to
capital flows. Under the autopilot mechanism, an expansion of the monetary base causes interest
rates  to  fall;  a  contraction  causes  them  to  rise.  The  crucial  element  in  the  monetary  base
influencing the rise and fall of interest rates is the aggregate balance that banks maintain in their
clearing  accounts  held  with  the  currency  board.  Notwithstanding  the  enormous  volume  of
transactions that goes through our banks, the aggregate balance is minimal, because our financial
infrastructure  is  so  efficient.  We  have  a  real-time  interbank  payment  system  and  no  reserve
requirements,  so  that  banks  in  Hong  Kong  do  not  need  to  maintain  large  balances  in  their
clearing accounts with the currency board: in August the aggregate balance was as low as HK$2
billion.  This  meant  that  the  aggregate  balance,  and  hence  interbank  interest  rates,  was  highly
sensitive to speculative attack.
We saw a series of such attacks over the past year, when various currency speculators took large
short positions against the Hong Kong dollar with the aim of destabilizing the linked exchange
rate. On all these occasions the attacks drove up the interbank interest rates to very high levels.
To the extent that the speculators had to borrow in the interbank market to fund their short Hong
Kong  dollar  positions,  the  interbank  interest  rates  were  high  enough  to  force  the  currency
speculators to abandon the attacks, unwind their short positions, and incur substantial losses. The
finely  tuned  currency  board  system  worked  well,  but  the  interest  rate  volatility  was  extreme:
during one attack, on 23 October 1997, the overnight interest rate shot up to nearly 300%. The
stock market took a nosedive, and the HKMA was sharply criticized for relying on this single
tool, the interest rate, to defend the Hong Kong dollar.
In August the speculators adopted a more sophisticated ploy. They introduced a form of double
play aimed at playing off the currency board system against the stock and futures markets. First,
to avoid being squeezed by high interest rates, they prefunded themselves in Hong Kong dollars
BIS Review   98/1998
- 3 -
in the debt market, swapping US dollars for Hong Kong dollars with multilateral institutions that
have raised Hong Kong dollars through the issue of debt. At the same time, they accumulated
large  short  positions  in  the  stock  index  futures  market.  They  then  sought  to  engineer  extreme
conditions in the money market by dumping huge amounts of Hong Kong dollars. This sell-off
was intended to cause a sharp interest rate hike, which in turn would have sent the stock market
plummeting.  The  collapse  of  the  stock  market  would  have  enabled  them  to  reap  a  handsome
profit from the futures contracts they had taken out.
A few figures will help give some idea of the scale of this attack and the vulnerability of Hong
Kong’s markets at the time. We estimate that the hedge funds involved had amassed in excess of
HK$30 billion in currency borrowings, at an interest cost of around HK$4 million a day. They
also held an estimated 80,000 short contracts, which translated into the following calculation: for
every fall of 1,000 points in the Hang Seng index they stood to make a profit of HK$4 billion. If
they  could  have  engineered  that  fall  within  1,000  days  they  would  have  broken  even.  If  they
could have achieved it within 100 days they would have netted HK$3.6 billion. All they had to
do was to wait for the best moment to dump their Hong Kong dollars, to drive up interest rates
and send a shock wave through the stock market. August was an opportune time: turnover in the
stock  market  had  shrunk  to  about  a  third  of  its  normal  level;  there  was  bad  news  as  the
government  announced  that  first-quarter  GDP  growth  had  been  negative;  and  rumours  were
flying around predicting the devaluation of the Renminbi and the severing of the link between
the Hong Kong dollar and the US dollar.
We  acted  swiftly  to  defeat  the  manipulators  at  their  own  game  with  a  series  of  measures  that
threw them off their guard, drove them out of the market, and raised the defences against future
attacks. First, drawing on the official reserves, we went into the stock and futures markets. In the
second half of August we accumulated US$15 billion worth of shares: I am happy to say they are
now  worth  US$19  billion,  but  our  aim  was  not  to  make  money;  it  was  simply  to  deter
manipulation  by  making  sure  that  it  did  not  pay  off.  That  objective  was  achieved.  The
manipulators were forced to close out their short positions, in many cases with heavy losses. And
we  followed  through  with  a  package  of  technical  measures  to  strengthen  our  currency  board
arrangement  to  make  our  money  market  less  susceptible  to  manipulation.  These  measures  are
working  well.  Further  reforms  are  being  introduced  in  the  securities  and  futures  markets  to
reduce the possibility of market dislocation.
Our actions served their purpose of deterring market manipulation.  We  could  not  passively  sit
through  the  speculative  attack  and  see  our  markets  overshoot  to  produce  profits  for  the
manipulators, and our entire financial system brought to the brink of collapse. We do not pretend
that our intervention in the markets was not a controversial act. This was not a decision that we
enjoyed taking. It involved many risks, not least among them the risk of being misunderstood.
Our  critics,  both  at  home  and  abroad,  have  accused  us  of  intervening  with  the  aim  simply  of
propping up the stock market; of being too afraid to face the pain from the necessary interest rate
volatility under a strict currency board system operating in difficult conditions; even of trying to
introduce  a  novel  form  of  state  ownership  by  acquiring  a  substantial  interest  in  Hong  Kong’s
major corporations. The essence of these charges is that what we did in August marked the end
of our long-standing and hugely successful philosophy of non-intervention in the markets.
I  think  it  is  now  increasingly  recognized  throughout  the  world  that  what  we  did  was  both
necessary and effective. But let me emphasize this: our actions in August  were  not  the  end  of
non-interventionism, not an abandonment of our free market principles, but a measure taken to
ensure  that  those  principles  prevailed.  Free  markets  cannot  mean  markets  that  can  be  freely
manipulated, particularly by large players operating in small markets. We did the minimum that
BIS Review   98/1998
- 4 -
was  necessary  to  preserve  the  integrity  of  our  linked  exchange  rate  system  and  allow  our
financial markets properly to perform the role of financial intermediation. Our responsibility was
to keep the markets free and fair for all investors. Not to have acted would, in my view, have
been  the  very  height  of  irresponsibility,  and  would  have  seriously  damaged  Hong  Kong’s
credibility as an international, and freely accessible, financial centre.
We now have a substantial shares portfolio. We have put that portfolio under the management of
a separate company at arms length from the HKMA to ensure that there is no conflict of interest
between  our  shareholdings  and  our  daily  operations  as  a  regulator.  Our  intention  is  to  sell  off
these  shares  very  gradually  in  a  way  that  will  have  no  impact  on  the  markets.  This  may  well
mean holding on to them for some time. Meanwhile, the markets have stabilized, and the Hang
Seng Index has, like other markets, been enjoying something of a resurgence over the last few
weeks.
Hong Kong’s Economic Strengths
I believe that in the future we shall be able to look back on our actions in August and September
as  a  resounding  reaffirmation  of  our  resolve  to  maintain  our  fifteen-year  record  of  currency
stability through the linked exchange rate. The link was introduced in October 1983 at a time of
uncertainty over Hong Kong’s future and declining confidence in the Hong Kong dollar. The link
has survived successive political and economic shocks, both global and regional. It is not only
weathering the current crisis, the greatest test so far: it will, I believe, come out of the crisis more
resilient than ever, fortified by the technical refinements to our currency board system and, more
important, be strengthened by the clear message that we have given about our determination to
maintain it.
The link is the lynchpin of our monetary system and a vital factor in our prosperity. It is worth
explaining why the stability of the Hong Kong dollar is so important to our economy, and why it
is that we have been able to maintain this stability at a time when the fixed exchange rates of so
many other freely convertible currencies in the region have collapsed.
We are a predominantly externally-oriented economy, and an economy that comes the closest of
any in the world to running itself on pure free market principles. The annual value of our external
trade is at least two and a half times that of our gross domestic product: most of it takes the form
of re-exports. We import nearly all of our daily needs, including food and water. We export most
of our manufactured products, together with a large range of financial and other services. We are
an  international  financial  centre  with  huge  capital  inflows  and  outflows,  and  no  exchange
controls.
In  such  an  economic  environment,  volatile  exchange  rates  would  introduce  instability  and
unpredictability without bringing any corresponding advantages, except possibly to those in the
foreign exchange industry. Businessmen would face greater currency risks in their international
transactions and would be forced to hedge their considerable  currency  exposures  at  great  cost.
Sharp  gyrations  in  the  exchange  rate,  and  the  kind  of  overshooting  that  we  have  seen  in  the
recent currency devaluations elsewhere would seriously undermine the stability of our financial
system,  and  confidence  in  it.  Nor  is  devaluation  necessary  to  help  make  us  more  competitive,
even given the fact that many of our neighbours have seen currency devaluations of between 20
and  80  per  cent.  Currency  devaluation  is  not  the  only  means  to  achieve  economic  adjustment,
and  the  argument  that  Hong  Kong  is  losing  out  by  maintaining  the  link  makes  little  sense  for
such  an  externally  oriented  economy.  Hong  Kong  is  achieving  its  adjustment  through  other
variables. Asset prices and the cost of production, particularly in the form of land and  rentals,
BIS Review   98/1998
- 5 -
have  come  down  very  sharply.  Wages  are  easing.  Manufacturers  and  service  providers  are
increasingly  able  to  lower  their  costs  while  at  the  same  time  seeking  improvements  in
productivity.
It is therefore quite misleading to claim, as many sceptics do, that without currency devaluation
Hong Kong cannot be competitive. We have chosen an alternative route towards adjustment, and
we  consider  ourselves  fortunate  that  we  have  the  capacity  to  make  that  choice.  This  capacity
comes from the fundamental strengths that make it possible for us to run an effective currency
board. These fundamentals can be reduced to four basic, and some what obvious, points. They
are so obvious, in fact, that  they  are  too  often  overlooked  in  the  narrow  discussions  about  the
prospects for the link, and it is worth setting them out.
First, our ample foreign currency reserves. These are the fruits of strict fiscal discipline, which
has produced surpluses year after year, and of prudent investment. Our reserves currently amount
to US$88.4 billion, the third largest in the world, after Japan and the Mainland of China. They
are equivalent to more than seven times the currency in circulation, one of the highest levels in
the world.
Secondly, we pursue a prudent fiscal policy, with small government  and  no  external  debt.  We
have a simple tax structure, a low tax rate, and a public sector expenditure that accounts for only
18% of GDP.
Thirdly, our financial system is sound. The banking system is strong and solvent, and well able to
cope  with  the  interest  rate  movements  necessary  under  the  currency  board  system.  Capital
adequacy ratios among locally incorporated banks average around 18%, and their problem debt
ratio is about 3.7%. Our standards of prudential supervision are among the highest in the world.
Fourthly, Hong Kong’s economy is flexible and responsive. Because they are governed by free
market  principles,  the  markets  respond  quickly  to  interest  rate  changes  and  other  variables,
making the economy resilient in absorbing external shocks and capable of adjusting efficiently to
validate the linked exchange rate.
These are Hong Kong’s economic strengths. Not all economies have them, or would necessarily
wish to have them, but they have enabled us to maintain a monetary system appropriate to Hong
Kong’s  unique  needs  and  capable  of  withstanding  the  storms  that  any  open  and  externally
oriented economy must necessarily expose itself to.
One  of  our  greatest  underlying  economic  strengths  is  our  relationship  with  the  Mainland  of
China,  a  relationship  which  helped  fuel  rapid  growth  in  both  economies  over  the  last  two
decades. Our two economies maintain extensive and highly productive economic links yet at the
same  time  operate  entirely  separate  economic  systems  under  the  one  country,  two  systems
formula. Not much more than a year ago, just before the Asian financial crisis erupted and on the
eve of the transfer of sovereignty over Hong Kong, pessimists were depicting this relationship as
a  weakness  rather  than  a  strength:  they  were  predicting  extensive  meddling  by  the  Central
Government,  and  consequently  a  loss  of  autonomy  and  dynamism  in  Hong  Kong.  They  have
been very wrong on this. The track record so far has been impressive, and all the more so given
the succession of crises over the last year.
As  far  as  Hong  Kong’s  monetary  system  is  concerned,  the  transfer  of  sovereignty  has  meant
more, not less, autonomy for Hong Kong. Whereas before the handover monetary policy often
required close consultations with the Secretary of State in London, the Central Government  in
BIS Review   98/1998
- 6 -
Beijing has left such matters entirely in the hands of the HKSAR Government. Furthermore, it
has strongly and clearly reiterated its support for what we are doing, its confidence in our ability
to  manage  things  on  our  own  and  its  preparedness  to  help  in  the  unlikely  event  that  help  is
needed.  Our  fundamental  policies  are  enshrined  in  the  Basic  Law:  among  these  are  fiscal
independence;  maintenance  of  Hong  Kong  as  an  international  financial  centre;  and  a  financial
system  governed  and  protected  by  locally  enacted  laws.  Most  important,  the  Basic  Law
prescribes a separate currency for Hong Kong - the Hong Kong dollar - which is to continue to be
freely exchangeable and fully backed by reserves. These points are worth stressing, because there
has been much misunderstanding about Hong Kong’s position.
The challenges ahead
I believe we should also look to the future, and not just dwell on current anxieties or deal with
the political fall-out from our recent measures against market manipulation. As I see it, there are
two main challenges ahead. One is the challenge before every economy in the region, including
Hong Kong, to pull ourselves out of the economic difficulties that now face us. The other is a
challenge to the global financial community as a whole.
For Hong Kong, the challenge is to see through the economic adjustment that is now in train, to
continue to promote our competitiveness, and to plan for economic recovery. There is no denial
that this is a painful process. Nor can there be any pretence that the current downturn will be over
quickly,  whatever  the  positive  signs  in  the  markets  over  the  past  few  weeks.  In  the  financial
markets we need to be vigilant against future attacks and to introduce further safeguards in our
financial  system.  These  safeguards  will  include  improvements  to  cross-market  surveillance  in
Hong Kong, and an in-depth exploration of possibilities for further strengthening the resilience
of the currency board system - an exercise which is now making good progress. More widely, we
need  to  continue  to  develop  Hong  Kong’s  position  as  a  premier  international  financial  centre.
Practical measures recently announced by the Chief Executive of the HKSAR will help in this:
they  include  schemes  ranging  from  the  upgrading  of  the  security  and  efficiency  of  our  entire
financial infrastructure to the expansion of research facilities in the form of a monetary institute
affiliated to the HKMA.
The emphasis in all of this is not on intervention, but on facilitation. As a government, we do not
direct  the  form  that  economic  growth  should  take:  we  simply  strive  to  provide  the  best
environment  that  we  can  to  enable  growth  to  take  place.  In  the  financial  sphere  that  means  a
stable  currency,  a  credible  and  secure  banking  system,  and  markets  that  sustain,  rather  than
undermine, economic development. There is much that we can do - and have done - locally to
achieve these aims. But increasingly, the solutions have to be global solutions, because, as the
events of the last year have amply demonstrated, some of the most intractable problems facing
our financial systems straddle borders and thrive in the cracks and holes between jurisdictions.
Globalization - the breaking down of economic barriers - has brought many benefits, particularly
to our own region. But it has also brought risks and instabilities that can only be tackled through
co-operation between governments.
Over  the  last  two  months  an  international  consensus  has  emerged  about  the  dangers  of
unmonitored, highly leveraged cross-border capital flows. In August we talked about the dangers
to small or medium markets, such as Hong Kong. Since the LTCM debacle in September, the
focus has been on the damage that huge international hedge funds, which are subject to virtually
no regulation, are capable of inflicting even on the larger markets. We now have a situation in
which the global financial market is outgrowing its infrastructure, or, to quote Charles Goodhart
of  the  London  School  of  Economics,  ‘Finance  is  rapidly  becoming  global;  but  laws  and
BIS Review   98/1998
- 7 -
regulations are national.’ The world financial community has now awoken to the dangers, and
seems to be unanimous on the point that action is needed. The G7 communique in late October
calling for strong global action to promote greater transparency in highly leveraged fund flows is
a step in the right direction. This has been reiterated at the APEC Summit last week  in  Kuala
Lumpur. The challenge will be in translating these calls into an effective system to ensure that
the kind of turmoil that has ravaged economies throughout our region does not repeat itself. And
the larger aim of this co-operation should be not just to draw up defensive measures, but to create
positive opportunities for building a new global financial order appropriate to the needs of the
twenty-first century.
BIS Review   98/1998
