Mr Heikensten reviews the financial crisis and looks at monetary policy
Address by the Deputy Governor of the Bank of Sweden, Mr Lars Heikensten, to the Swedish
Shareholders’ Association in Stockholm on 30/11/98.
Many thanks for the invitation to participate this evening. For more than a year now, discussions
about  global  economic  developments  have  in  many  respects  been  occupied  with  the  financial
crisis—the  crisis  that  was  first  Asian,  then  also  Russian  and  finally  seen  as  global.  Economic
analyses  are  full  of  words  like  uncertainty  and  unpredictability;  no  one  can  yet  tell  what  the
effects will finally be.
The crisis has clearly demonstrated how mobile capital has become, as well as the close global
interrelatedness of national economies. This has intensified the debate about the global financial
system, its advantages and drawbacks. How can crises of this type be prevented from happening
again? And how can the present crisis be overcome? An answer to the latter question is of major
importance for future economic development. Things that happen in Bangkok have turned out to
be important for shareholders in Stockholm.
One night in Bangkok
For  a  number  of  years  the  rest  of  the  world  regarded  the  Asian  economies  as  something  of  a
miracle.  Their  growth  was  astonishing  and  the  high  saving  and  investment  ratios  gave  the
impression  that  this  would  continue.  Orderly  public  finances  were  accompanied  by  exchange
rates  that  seemed  to  be  completely  firm.  The  prospect  of  undiminished  growth  attracted  an
inflow  of  capital  to  the  Asian  Tigers  from  investors  in  the  West  who  were  looking  for  a  high
return and a greater diversification of risk.
There  is  no  single  factor  which  explains  why  the  tiger  economies  changed,  in  the  eyes  of
investors,  into  paper  tigers.  There  are  even  those  who  argue  that  the  crisis  arose  not  so  much
from altered economic conditions as from general nervousness among investors. The answer is
probably  a  combination  of  the  two,  with  a  number  of  economic  and  political  factors  that
triggered a chain reaction from country to country. One serious problem in these countries was
that  their  banking  systems  had  not  been  fully  prepared  for  the  incoming  avalanche  of
international capital. In much the same way as in the 1980s in Sweden, the good supply of capital
had  pushed  up  prices  for  equity  and  real  estate,  thereby  creating  a  bubble.  In  some  countries,
moreover, a current account deficit and the fixed exchange rate had become untenable. Another
common denominator was the very short-term profile of external borrowing.
Uncertainty  about  the  future  path  of  these  economies  gradually  grew.  Investors  became
increasingly cautious. The devaluation of the Thai currency in July 1997 caused a sharp reaction.
Capital flows to the region were stopped. Currencies depreciated sharply and interest rates rose.
The currencies of Malaysia, Indonesia and South Korea followed in the wake of the Thai baht.
The gold turned to sand
At first the crisis was seen as a regional problem, with no substantial effects in other parts of the
global economy. Investors focused instead on other regions and last spring there was a quieter,
though  still  nervous,  period.  This  proved,  however,  to  be  the  calm  before  the  storm.  On  17
August  the  Russian  government  announced  a  freezing  of  rouble  debt  and  a  devaluation  of  the
rouble.
BIS Review   102/1998
– 2 –
This  markedly  altered  the  mood  among  international  investors.  The  combination  of  an
unexpectedly large devaluation and a unilateral suspension of rouble debt payments heightened
investors’  aversion  to  risks.  If  this  could  happen  in  Russia,  perhaps  it  could  happen  in  other
countries, too. The imposition of capital controls in Malaysia accentuated the concern.
The crisis therefore spread to other emerging markets, not least in Latin America. Stock markets
fell around the world. The possibility that industrialised countries might be hit by other effects
than those related to trade gave the crisis a new dimension. The problems in the US hedge fund
Long Term Capital Management (LTCM, perhaps something of a misnomer for a company bent
on reaping quick profits on invested capital) aroused fears  that  large  losses  might  make  banks
excessively cautious and thereby restrict access to borrowed capital. Many forecasters now began
to revise their assessments of global economic development.
Watch out!
The most obvious cause of lower global growth is decreased net exports to the crisis-burdened
countries.  Countries  that  trade  with  the  debt-burdened  countries  experience  a  weakening  of
growth  as  falling  exports  are  accompanied  by  a  gradual  increase  in  their  imports.  At  first  the
direct trade effects are not expected to be all that large; but as other regions are affected by the
crisis, they may be more pronounced.
New  risks  then  arise  that  are  more  difficult  to  assess  because  they  relate  to  sentiment  and
confidence. One factor of importance for the rate of global  economic  growth  is consumer  and
business confidence. There are some statistical signs that confidence has fallen. Future prospects
have become less bright above all in the United States and the United Kingdom, but also in many
of  the  prospective  euro  countries.  Swedish  households  are  more  doubtful  about  the  general
economic future but still believe their personal economic situation will improve. Companies are
also somewhat more pessimistic.
Another potential threat to economic growth was detected in the summer and early autumn. The
problems in LTCM led to talk of a credit crunch. Briefly, this is a situation in which banks, after
some bad experiences and loan losses, do all they can to reduce risk exposure and slim balance
sheets; as a result, the banks cannot be induced to finance even the most stunning commercial
ideas. Without access to investment capital, economic activity declines.
Certain signs of an approaching credit crunch could be discerned in financial markets, above all
in the United States.  They  first  took  the  form  of  an  aversion  to  supplying  credit  to  all  but  the
soundest  borrowers.  Later  there  was  a  reluctance  to  provide  long-term  loans  to  anyone,
regardless of their credit rating.
The weakening of growth and inflation prospects in the light of the financial unrest has prompted
central banks to lower interest rates this autumn. The interest rate cuts have contributed to the
somewhat  calmer  situation  recently  in  financial  markets.  Interest  rate  differentials  between
industrialised countries and emerging market economies have tended to narrow from a high level
and so have spreads in the western markets between borrowers with different credit ratings. In
Sweden, the spread between treasury and housing bonds has fallen from 0.9 percentage points in
mid October to 0.5 percentage points at present.
Stock markets have also recovered from the sharp fall during the autumn. In the United States,
equity  prices  have  now  rebounded  to  the  levels  of  before  the  period  of  nervousness.  Current
equity prices are notably bullish and mirror expectations of very good growth and high business
BIS Review   102/1998
– 3 –
profits. The recovery on the Stockholm Stock Exchange has not been quite as strong; after a fall
of around 40 per cent from July to October, the index is now at the same level as at the end of
August.
Although  there  now  seems  to  be  somewhat  less  risk  of  the  global  crisis  becoming  more
profound,  it  will  probably  still  lead  to  a  weaker  international  economic  development  that  will
also  affect  the  situation  in  Sweden,  not  least  during  1999.  During  the  autumn  the  Riksbank’s
appraisal  of  both  growth  and  inflation  in  Sweden  has  been  revised  downwards.  Inflationary
pressure in our economy is very low and expectations seem to have been adjusted to it remaining
low. A more detailed picture of inflation prospects is contained in our Inflation Report, which is
to be published this Thursday.
The name of the game
Developments  this  autumn  and  the  way  in  which  the  Asian  crisis  has  spread  across  the  globe
have broken some market perceptions. Loan payments were suddenly suspended unilaterally by
such a large country as Russia. And the problems in a single US hedge fund turned out to be so
large as to render the situation in financial markets uncertain and require rescue operations by the
major  commercial  banks.  The  world  was  not  quite  what  it  had  been.  A  number  of  observers,
including the Chairman of the US Federal Reserve, even considered that what had happened was
without precedent in the global economy.
The crisis has enlivened the discussion about global financial systems. In the short run, it is the
acute  crisis  that  must  be  resolved.  The  interest  rate  cuts,  not  least  in  the  United  States,  have
played an important part here. In the longer term, conditions must be created whereby the global
financial  system  functions  sensibly.  Matters  that  are  being  discussed  in  the  longer  perspective
include the role of the IMF and how to help the problem countries. There is also the question of
ensuring  that  countries  and  private  agents,  instead  of  distorting  reality,  provide  an  accurate
picture of their situation. Other matters are the construction of systems so that early warnings are
sounded  if,  for  example,  the  situation  in  the  bank  sector  is  becoming  untenable,  and  how  to
prevent  investors  from  building  up  such  large  risks.  The  discussion  also  concerns  the  free
movement of capital and how its negative effects can be restricted.
Permit me  to  dwell  fairly  briefly  on  these  large  and  important  matters.  This  is  a  discussion  to
which  we  at  the  Riksbank  will  no  doubt  be  returning.  Solutions  to  some  of  the  questions  are
relatively easy to find; others will require a great deal of lengthy discussion over a considerable
period and may even then not be entirely satisfactory.
The IMF to the rescue
The immediate resolution of the crises in Asian countries and, most recently, in Brazil has been
spearheaded  by  the  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF).  Thailand,  Indonesia  and  South  Korea
were  offered  financial  support  by  the  Fund,  subject  to  certain  conditions.  These  loan  terms
concerned both the formulation of economic policy and some structural measures. Interest rates
were  to  be  increased,  accompanied  by  fiscal  restrictions  to  restore  a  balance  or  a  surplus  to
government  budgets.  Consolidation  of  the  banking  system  and  stricter  supervision  were  also
required. Reforms in other fields were demanded to make the economy function more efficiently.
The  economic  recession  in  the  problem  countries  turned  out  to  be  considerably  deeper  than
expected. The IMF has been criticised for requiring tough restrictive measures. With growth in
the Japanese  economy  at  a  standstill,  moreover,  these  countries  did  not  have  the  benefit  of  an
BIS Review   102/1998
– 4 –
external  stimulus.  International  investors  and  banks  were  not  prepared  to  renew  loans  to
countries which had obtained support from the Fund. The currency depreciation continued. Some
adjustments were made to the IMF programmes.
Broadly speaking, the Fund’s management of the crisis has been criticised from two standpoints.
One is that the Fund’s terms are too harsh and tend to contribute to domestic poverty without any
benefits  in  real  economic  or  financial  terms.  The  other  standpoint  is  that  the  IMF  hands  out
money far too readily to all comers without demanding enough in return.
The support currently provided by the Fund is intended to enable the crisis-burdened countries to
spread the necessary adjustments over a longer period than would otherwise have been possible.
There  is  then  less  risk  of  output  falling  sharply.  It  can  also  help  to  forestall  financial  market
unrest.  The  latter  can  benefit  other  countries  that  might  otherwise  be  hit,  more  or  less
undeservedly, by large movements in exchange rates and interest rates. Moreover, IMF support
can induce other lenders to provide financial assistance. The programmes drawn up by the Fund
have led industrialised countries to come forward and contribute financial support.
In situations like this the IMF can also serve as a much-needed whipping-boy. Governments in
crisis-burdened countries can point to the Fund as the task-master behind various measures and
thereby achieve reforms that are essential but troublesome.
All  this  presupposes  that  the  Fund’s  demands  on  the  crisis-burdened  countries  are  properly
balanced.  The  programmes  must  make  financial  markets  confident  that  the  countries  will
ultimately be able to repay the loans. Some critics consider that the IMF, instead of adapting to
the  changeover  from  previously  regulated  markets  to  globally  interrelated  markets,  is  simply
following the beaten track without sufficient heed to the new environment.
Earlier crises had more to do with purely macroeconomic factors which the IMF could remedy by
following  a  relatively  simple  diagnostic  procedure  —  focusing  on  the  balance  of  payments  —
and prescribing the medicine that suited the country in question. Today’s crises call for measures
over a wider field. Ordering an interest rate  increase,  for  instance,  as  a  cure  for  exchange  rate
instability is not as self-evident a solution when higher interest rates are liable to worsen a weak
banking system’s difficulties or undermine government finances.
At  the  same  time  it  is  important  that  the  IMF  concentrates  on  the  crisis-burdened  countries’
fundamental  macroeconomic  and  financial  problems.  An  ambition  to  tackle  a  wider  range  of
issues  may  run  into  trouble.  No  matter  how  well-grounded  the  structural  changes  may  be,  the
Fund  can,  for  example,  be  accused  of  exerting  an  undue  influence  on  policy  in  the  problem
countries or of serving the trade policy interests of other countries.
There is broad agreement among the industrialised countries that it is the IMF which should act
in situations like the one in Asia. The IMF is also our own organisation; Sweden is represented
on the Board and cannot dissociate itself from what the Fund is doing. An active discussion is
now in progress to learn from recent developments. So far, however, no general consensus has
been reached except as regards increased transparency in many respects.
Openness and oversight
One  recipe  for  a  sounder  financial  system  that  has  been  discussed  and  agreed  on  is  better
transparency both among private players and on the part of the IMF and various public agents.
Some  of  the  problems  could  be  avoided  if  a  fair  picture  of  the  situation  were  provided,  for
BIS Review   102/1998
– 5 –
instance by ensuring that statistics are correct and generally available. In some cases, investors’
assessments concerning Southeast Asia had a misleading foundation, for example as regards the
situation among banks and large companies as well as the size of foreign reserves.
Advocating more transparency comes naturally to a Swede. We put the case frequently, at home
as well as in  international  fora.  The  IMF,  for  example,  ought  to  be  able  to  present  its  country
assessments more openly. We have already taken steps in this direction that we hope will exert
natural pressure on other countries to do likewise. At the same time, this is a good illustration of
the IMF as the sum of its members. Even in the group of Nordic countries there are members that
have pulled in a different direction.
The IMF should also go further in explaining its actions so that these are better understood. Just
as we consider that independent central banks have to be open in order to gain support for what
they are doing, so must the IMF generate greater popular and political support for its work.
Another  requirement  for  a  sounder  financial  system  is  better  oversight  and  supervision  of  the
financial system in each country. Over the years there have been numerous instances of where
the combination of free capital movements and inadequate supervision can take us if things go
wrong.  As  Swedes,  the  bank  crisis  in  the  early  1990s  gave  us  a  ringside  view  of  the
consequences. One good result of that crisis — a late compensation, if you will — is that today
the Swedish banks are less exposed.
A decade ago, international agreement was reached on the amount of capital banks are required
to hold so that they are in a position to weather troublesome times. Last year the Basle capital
adequacy requirements were augmented with 25 core principles for determining whether or not a
country’s banking system is sound and its bank supervision effective. A first step towards better
bank  supervision  is  to  ensure  that  more  countries  are  in  fact  complying  with  the  rules  and
principles  that  have  already  been  established.  It  has  been  proposed  that  a  country’s  access  to
capital from the IMF be linked to the degree to which it observes these principles. The competent
national institutions for banking supervision should also be scrutinised and adapted, so that they
possess the resources for coping with the new financial environment.
Another step towards better supervision involves an ongoing development of the existing rules
and regulations so that they are appropriate for today’s reality. One matter that is being discussed
is  a  review  of  the  capital  adequacy  standards.  The  banks’  lending  operations,  for  instance  to
LTCM, were astonishing. In this context I can mention the discussions that are in progress about
highly  indebted  players  and  how  they  can  be  included  in  supervision  to  prevent  them  taking
unduly large risks.
Sound risk diversification
One of the issues — probably one of the knottiest — that are being discussed is how problem
countries can obtain financial support without this giving rise to expectations that a country with
financial problems will always be rescued by some international institution.
If  private  investors  get  the  idea  that  any  profits  will  accrue  to  them  and  can  rest  assured  that
someone else will intervene and absorb any losses, they will be all the more prone to take risky
positions.  Investments  that  would  normally  not  be  attractive  will  find  takers  because  there  is
everything to gain and nothing to lose. This can result in the form of moral hazard that involves
unduly risky behaviour. Signs of such behaviour have been found. Spreads between government
bonds issued by industrialised countries and emerging market countries such as Russia suggest
BIS Review   102/1998
– 6 –
that investors expected to be bailed out and were therefore not demanding full compensation for
risks.
Moral hazard could conceivably also result in a particular country or countries taking excessive
risks,  though  this  is  presumably  much  less  likely.  The  political  cost  to  a  country  of  becoming
bankrupt is exceedingly high, as is almost too clear from developments in South Korea, Thailand
and Indonesia.
So  what  can  be  done  to  counter  moral  hazard  in  the  financial  system?  One,  seemingly  self-
evident, remedy is to get the private players to carry a larger share of the burden when problems
arise.  That  in  turn  could  make  them  act  more  prudently.  This  is  being  discussed.  The  crux,
however,  is  that  the  investors  and  banks  concerned  are  caught  in  what  is  known  as  prisoner’s
dilemma. Smart investors count on being able to take a little extra risk and then be the first to
exit  when  things  go  wrong.  The  dilemma  they  face,  however,  is  that  when  everyone  makes  a
simultaneous dash for the exit, most of them are trapped because the market then ceases to be
liquid.
One  possibility  is  a  system,  involving  a  third  party,  whereby  individual  investors  are  made  to
realise that less headlong behaviour in the throes of a crisis could be more advantageous for them
as well as for everyone else. The remaining cake can then be divided more fairly among all those
involved.  One  procedure  for  this,  adopted  in  connection  with  the  Asian  crisis,  could  be  to
monitor bank lending globally. This was tried out  in  the  case  of  South  Korea;  the  banks  were
persuaded  to  renew  credits  pending  a  more  orderly  solution.  Another  matter  that  is  being
discussed is how bonds could be constructed with a clause that makes it possible to implement
the type of procedure that applies to default.
The markets and capital movements
The  Asian  crisis  has  clearly  demonstrated  the  mobility  of  international  capital.  Technical  and
financial developments have meant that positions  can  be  taken  and  closed  much  more  quickly
than before.
Some of the rapid shifts in many countries’ exchange rates and interest rates do not seem to have
been  motivated  by  changes  in  the  macro  economy  or  other  fundamental  factors.  This  raises
difficult questions. Capital movements of this kind may ultimately elicit political reactions that
threaten the existence of free capital markets.
The complexity of the issue is illustrated by consequences of the new Basle rules. These rules
prescribe  capital  cover  for  the  mark-to-market  value  of  many  assets.  This  is  basically  a  good
thing  in  that  it  reduces  the  risk  of  failures.  But  together  with  the  models  on  which  risk
assessments are based (using historical data), rules of this type probably also tend to accentuate
flock  behaviour  among  international  investors.  Continuous  marking  to  market  does  give  a  fair
picture of the situation in each company but probably also leads to an increased need for quick
financial rearrangements. A price change in one country immediately alters the spectrum of risks
and this triggers a wave of buying and selling.
Perhaps we must acknowledge at this stage that we have been a little too  optimistic  about  the
workings of the international financial system and self-regulating mechanisms, in much the same
way as we were about Sweden in the late 1980s.
BIS Review   102/1998
– 7 –
Seen  in  this  light,  the  demands  for  extensive  capital  controls  that  are  now  being  aired  in  the
debate  are  hardly  surprising.  This  would  not  be  practicable,  however,  particularly  not  in  the
longer run.
There are examples — Chile in recent years is one — where measures for controlling short-term
capital seem to have worked well. It should be underscored, however, that these measures have
been one item in a very soundly implemented economic policy that also includes tight budgets,
institutional and growth-enhancing reforms, and lower inflation.
Chile’s  experience  is  therefore  by  no  means  directly  applicable  to  other  countries.  Another
important  point  is  that  Chile’s  aim  has  been  to  become  less  dependent  on  short-term  foreign
capital. The measures have not restricted outflows — which is liable to be counterproductive —
but made inflows less attractive.
Just where the discussion of capital movements will take us remains to be seen. Here, too, there
is  reason  to  underscore  the  importance  of  transparency  and  rules  that  work  properly.  Another
matter  that  has  been  raised  in  the  debate  is  the  importance  of  carrying  out  deregulations  and
structural changes both in an orderly manner and in the right sequence.
Measures  of  this  type  will  probably  not  suffice  to  solve  all  the  problems  connected  with  free
capital  movements.  A  continued  discussion  is  therefore  needed  without  an  unduly  strong
ideological gloss. However, such a discussion is unlikely to result in any dramatic changes in the
international financial system.
The winner takes it all?
The  world  economy  has  recently  been  going  through  a  deep  crisis  —  an  Asian  crisis  that  has
acquired  a  global  dimension.  The  ultimate  effects  of  the  crisis  are  difficult  to  predict  but  its
course to date should be a lesson to many.
   Households have been reminded that saving in equity is not without risks. How long this
reminder  will  last  is  another  matter  —  US  stock  markets  have  already  shot  up  again
towards new all-time highs.
Large investors with a high level of debt have also been cautioned. An exceptionally high
return presupposes exceptionally high risks and thereby entails large losses if things go
wrong.
The  banks  have  learned  similar  lessons,  particularly  those  that  used  highly  leveraged
funds as a way of accommodating high risks. But even those who function as overseers of
financial systems — governments and central banks — have learned something from the
latest  crisis.  Work  has  been  stepped  up  to  create  a  lastingly  robust  framework  for  the
satisfactory functioning of the global financial system.
Today I have concentrated on the financial system in the longer perspective. But in the midst of
all  the  uncertainty  about  the  present  situation,  there  is  one  thing  about  which  we  can  be  quite
sure: this is not the last financial crisis. Now that the situation in financial markets has become
somewhat  more  stable,  we  should  not  suppose  that  everything  is  all  right  again.  The  financial
market players — savers, investors, fund managers, supervisors and overseers — must not lower
their guard. Not again.
BIS Review   102/1998
