Mr Thiessen reviews the Canadian economy and monetary policy in unsettled times
Speech by the Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  Mr  Gordon  Thiessen,  to  the  Greater  Victoria
Chamber of Commerce in Victoria, British Columbia on 7/12/98.
When  the  Asian  crisis  erupted  in  the  summer  of  1997,  few  observers  anticipated  that
international  financial  markets  would  still  be  under  its  influence  more  than  a  year  later.  Most
expected that the crisis would be contained and resolved relatively quickly. But then who could
have foreseen a year ago that the Japanese situation would deteriorate as much as it has; or that
Russia  would  declare  a  debt  moratorium,  jolting  markets  everywhere,  and  increasing  financial
pressure on parts of Latin America?
All these unexpected developments have slowed world economic activity.  Canada’s  very  open
economy  has  not  been  immune  to  these  forces.  The  sharp  decline  over  the  past  year  in  the
demand for, and the prices of, the key primary commodities we produce has taken its toll. British
Columbia has been particularly hard hit because it produces and exports a larger share of such
goods than other Canadian provinces. These developments have  been  reflected  in  the  value  of
our currency, which has declined substantially against the U.S. dollar.
All  this  seems  to  have  provided  fertile  ground  for  some  pessimistic  scenarios.  Indeed,  some
commentaries have raised the spectre of global recession and deflation, implying a consequent
downturn for Canada. Are such concerns justified, or are they an overreaction to events?
I believe that the pessimistic commentary has been overdone. Given the global uncertainty and
financial market volatility of the past year, Canada has been coping relatively well. It is normal
for people to feel queasy and to fear the worst when caught in the kind of stormy seas we have
encountered in the past year. But the important thing to remember is that these days Canada is
better positioned to ride out the storm. And we will feel much better if we can keep our eyes on
the horizon – for there are signs that the sky is clearing.
What I would like to do this morning is to put the recent changes in the global economic and
financial environment in perspective. Next, I will look at the implications for the world economy
and for Canada in particular. I will finish with a discussion of the Bank of Canada’s response to
the international turbulence.
Global financial problems in perspective
I will spare you the detailed chronology of the past year’s events. You are probably already too
familiar with it. Rather, I intend to focus on what has made this latest episode of global financial
turbulence  more  troublesome  than  others  in  recent  history.  This  should  help  us  see  recent
developments in the Canadian economy and in monetary policy in a clearer light. It should also
provide  some  insight  on  what  needs  fixing  in  the  international  financial  system  and  what
mistakes to avoid in the future.
So, why has the 1997–98 financial turmoil been more widespread and long-lasting? The way I
see it, there were two main reasons. First, with the benefit of hindsight, it is clear that too many
incautious  international  portfolio  investments  were  made  in  the  wake  of  the  growing
globalization of capital markets. Second, it has taken Japan much longer than expected to deal
with its serious economic and financial problems, problems that long predated the Asian crisis.
BIS Review  104/1998
– 2 –
Let me explain why I think these factors have had such an impact this time around.
First, the matter of incautious international investment practices – what was the problem here?
With  the  opening  up  of  financial  markets  and  with  the  decline  in  interest  rates  in  industrial
countries, a growing number of investors were attracted to higher returns abroad. “Abroad” often
meant the so-called emerging market countries, particularly those in Asia. With their rapid rates
of economic growth year after year, these countries seemed to have great investment potential.
But  foreign  investments,  especially  in  emerging  markets,  are  far  more  complex  than  domestic
ones. And assessing these investments can  be  very  tricky.  For  one  thing,  investors  are  dealing
with companies operating far away, in a very different economic and political environment. For
another, financial regulatory and supervisory practices in some of these countries are less well-
developed and transparent. In addition, investors may have felt rather well “protected” from risks
–  for  a  couple  of  reasons.  First,  past  assistance  packages  by  the  International  Monetary  Fund
(IMF)  and  other  international  agencies  may  have  led  them  to  believe  that  the  international
community would always come to the rescue if worst came to worst. Second, many investment
advisers  evidently  were  not  terribly  fussed  about  the  exchange  rate  risk  because  most  Asian
currencies were fixed to the U.S. dollar. It is all too easy to forget that having a fixed exchange
rate is not in and of itself a guarantee that a currency will not decline in value – which in fact is
what many of these currencies have done.
In  the  end,  huge  amounts  were  placed  in  emerging  markets  in  the  1990s  by  mutual  funds,
pension funds, financial institutions, and their clients, evidently without full appreciation of the
risks involved. Moreover, many banks in these emerging markets were  also  taking  large  risks.
They were borrowing short term from foreign banks, in U.S. dollars, at relatively low rates, and
lending  out  long  term,  in  domestic  currency,  at  high  rates  –  often  to  domestic  real  estate
developers.
When pegged exchange rate systems in Asia broke down under pressure, because they were fixed
at  levels  that  had  become  incompatible  with  changing  economic  fundamentals,  both  local  and
foreign investors rushed for the exits. And as exchange rates tumbled and interest rates soared, a
host  of  other  long-standing  problems,  especially  related  to  weak  banking  systems,  were
unearthed.  Investors  that  got  burned  in  Southeast  Asia  tried  to  reduce  their  exposure  to  all
emerging markets.
Initially, emerging countries outside Asia managed to withstand the pressure – until the outbreak
of  the  Russian  crisis.  That  Russia  was  running  into  serious  fiscal  difficulties  had  been  well
known for some time. But its decision to declare a unilateral moratorium on its debt last August
shook markets everywhere, and even the most sophisticated investors became very agitated. The
resulting global reassessment of risk, and the greater weight placed by investors on security, led
to  a  movement  of  funds  out  of  emerging  market  bonds  and  corporate  bonds  into  more  secure
U.S.  Treasury  bonds.  Interest  rates  rose  in  the  markets  for  riskier  securities,  and  liquidity
tightened – hence, the concerns through the autumn about a global “credit crunch” and recession.
The second factor that has exacerbated the global financial turbulence this time is the surprising
severity and intractability of Japan’s long-standing economic and financial problems. Remember,
Japan is the second largest economy in the world. Most of us expected that, once the Japanese
recognized  the  seriousness  of  their  problems,  they  would  move  quickly  and  decisively  to  fix
BIS Review  104/1998
– 3 –
them. A stronger Japanese economy would have made a significant difference to the outlook for
the world economy. And it would have helped to speed up the turnaround in Southeast Asia –
much  as  a  strong  U.S.  economy  facilitated  the  adjustment  in  Mexico,  following  the  1994–95
crisis  in  that  country.  The  deterioration  of  the  Japanese  economic  and  political  climate  in  the
spring and early summer of 1998 was an important factor in the intensified market pressures that
precipitated the Russian crisis last August.
What to do about the global turmoil?
So what are we to conclude from all this?
The last thing we should do is retreat behind national borders and start placing restrictions on the
free flow of international capital. That would be very unfortunate. Even though capital flows may
sometimes prove difficult to handle, especially for small countries, there is much to be gained
from access to world savings – provided those savings are used prudently and productively. What
we must do is find ways to minimize the costs, without giving up the benefits.
The Bank of Canada believes that a flexible exchange rate is very useful in this context. Under
such a system, borrowers and lenders are constantly aware of the exchange rate risk, and the kind
of pressures that built up behind the fixed exchange rates in Asia last year are much less likely to
emerge.
I should also note that a good deal of work has already been done by the international community
to  strengthen  the  global  financial  system  and  reduce  the  risk  that  these  recent  problems  will
recur. In their October communiqué, the Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors of the
G-7 countries outlined a series of initiatives. These are designed to: increase the transparency of
the international financial system; promote international standards of good practice;  strengthen
incentives  to  meet  such  standards;  provide  assistance  to  developing  countries  to  reform  and
reinforce their economic and financial systems; and put in place a process for crisis management
that envisages the involvement of private lenders at an early stage.
But  all  this,  you  may  say,  is  to  improve  the  international  navigation  and  radar  systems  in  the
future. Meanwhile, we are still in difficult seas, wondering what’s up ahead and worrying what
may hit us next.
How worried should we be about the world economy and the outlook for Canada?
Keeping our eyes on the horizon
I can tell you that there are positive factors in the picture as we look ahead. Let me elaborate,
starting with the global environment. Perhaps the most reassuring element is that the economic
expansion in the main industrialized countries, except Japan, is still well sustained. Remember
that these countries account for more than half of world output. The U.S. economy, in particular,
remains strong, growing much faster than anticipated in the third quarter. So even if it slows, that
economy – Canada’s main export market – will still be operating at relatively high levels. The
major  European  economies,  as  a  group,  are  also  expanding  moderately.  And  a  number  of
industrial  countries,  including  the  United  States,  the  United  Kingdom,  and  many  countries  in
continental Europe, have lowered their interest rates to help sustain domestic spending.
BIS Review  104/1998
– 4 –
Japan  is  still  the  main  uncertainty  at  this  point.  But  the  recent  legislation  to  rehabilitate  its
banking  sector,  which  is  at  the  core  of  Japan’s  problems,  and  other  measures  proposed  to
stimulate the economy are grounds for cautious optimism. If these are implemented in a sensible,
systematic fashion, the world economic outlook will brighten considerably.
Another factor that added to the pessimism through the early autumn was the concern about a
“credit  crunch”  in  the  United  States  that  could  spread  elsewhere,  including  here  in  Canada.
However,  the  recent  interest  rate  reductions  by  the  U.S.  Federal  Reserve  have  eliminated  the
worst  scenarios  envisaged  at  the  time.  Some  of  the  rise  in  interest  rates  on  “less-than-prime”
debt, which occurred during the autumn  because  of  concerns  in  global  markets  about  risk  and
liquidity, has reversed. And the availability of credit is slowly improving.
This is not to say that we are completely out of trouble yet; or that there is no longer considerable
uncertainty  out  there.  But,  for  the  reasons  I  have  discussed,  I  certainly  do  not  believe  that  the
scenarios of worldwide recession and deflation are very likely as we look ahead.
As for Canada, it is true that we have been hit hard by the more than 15% decline in commodity
prices over the past year. It is also true that those lower prices, together with the slowing world
economy, are affecting our export industries – a fact that this audience probably knows only too
well. It is also evident that the nervousness and volatility in financial markets have made some
Canadian  consumers  and  businesses  less  confident,  affecting  domestic  spending  plans.  As  a
result, the Canadian economy has expanded much more moderately this year than in 1997, when
it grew by more than 4% (fourth quarter over fourth quarter).
As  we  look  ahead  to  1999,  the  considerable  degree  of  global  uncertainty  that  is  still  lingering
makes  all  economic  forecasts  more  tentative  than  usual.  Because  financial  stability  is  so
important  for  household  and  business  confidence,  the  expansion  of  our  economy  will  be
influenced  by  how  quickly  global  financial  markets  stabilize.  Still,  with  accommodative
monetary conditions and recent solid employment gains, spending by Canadian households and
businesses, while slowing, should continue to contribute to an expanding economy. And, based
on  the  Bank’s  current  assessment  of  the  world  economic  outlook  and  Canada’s  improved
competitiveness, our exports should continue to grow.
The monetary policy response to the international turbulence
Let  me  now  turn  to  monetary  policy.  You  will  not  be  surprised  to  hear  that  throughout  this
period,  the  conduct  of  policy  has  been  influenced  by  these  exceptional  international
developments.
The  sharp  drop  in  commodity  prices  has  inevitably  meant  lower  incomes  and  wealth  for
Canadians. And we have had no choice but to adjust. Because we are on a floating exchange rate,
much of the adjustment has taken place through a decline in the external value of the Canadian
dollar.  Had  we  been  on  a  fixed  exchange  rate,  we  would  still  have  had  to  adjust.  But  the
adjustment  would  have  been  more  difficult,  since  it  would  have  had  to  come  mainly  through
downward pressure on output, employment, and wages.
The depreciation of the Canadian dollar since the fall of 1997, while distressing, had for the most
part been relatively orderly  before  the  Russian  crisis  in  August.  At  that  point,  pressure  on  our
currency intensified because of a frantic worldwide capital flight to more secure U.S. assets and
BIS Review  104/1998
– 5 –
an exaggerated sense internationally of the importance of commodities for Canada. The move out
of  “commodity  currencies”  was  intensified  by  fears  that  Russia  would  start  dumping
commodities on world markets.
As  the  decline  in  the  Canadian  dollar  accelerated  through  August,  medium-  and  long-term
interest  rates,  including  mortgage  rates,  began  to  rise  sharply  at  a  time  when  comparable  U.S.
rates  were  falling.  We  took  this  as  a  signal  of  potential  loss  of  confidence  in  Canadian  dollar
investments that could prove very costly for the economy. To head that off, we raised the Bank
Rate by one percentage point in late August.
Our  action,  and  the  subsequent  return  of  some  stability  to  markets  in  the  United  States  and
elsewhere, helped to restore confidence in Canadian dollar assets. And medium- and longer-term
interest rates came back down.
When the U.S. Federal Reserve  lowered  its  target  interest  rate  three  times  between  September
and November, because of concerns about a possible “credit crunch” and an expected slowing in
their  economy,  we  followed  with  similar  reductions  in  our  Bank  Rate.  These  cuts  were
appropriate, given the importance of the U.S. economy to Canada, our continued low inflation
rate, and the improving international financial climate.
I know that the depreciation of the Canadian dollar has been a source of concern and dismay to
many people. One concern is that a weak currency blunts the incentives to improve productivity
in the export sector. I must say that this is more likely to be a problem if the weakness of the
currency reflects an inflationary environment. But such is not the case in Canada today. Inflation
is low and stable, and the Bank of Canada is formally committed to keeping it that way.
At  the  same  time,  I  most  certainly  agree  that  we  should  always  be  looking  at  our  economic
policies  from  the  perspective  of  their  likely  impact  on  the  growth  of  productivity.  After  all,
productivity is what matters for a sound economic performance and for rising standards of living
over time. Currently, the low Canadian dollar provides an opportunity for Canadian businesses to
expand their presence in foreign markets. But they must also continue to work hard to increase
productivity and to ensure that they stay competitive as our currency regains strength.
What about monetary policy – what is it doing to further productivity? The focus of Canadian
monetary policy is on domestic price stability. This means keeping inflation low and stable over
time – currently within a target range of 1% to 3%. The Bank aims to avoid both inflation and
deflation. And if we are successful, we will have provided Canadians with greater predictability,
fewer cyclical fluctuations, and sustained low interest rates. I believe that a monetary policy that
seeks  to  provide  this  kind  of  environment  is  the  most  conducive  to  productivity  growth  over
time.
Concluding remarks
To conclude, let me just say that Canada cannot escape the uncertainties that have clouded the
global economic outlook. The pace of economic expansion in Canada is not as robust as it was a
year  ago.  But  our  economy  should  continue  to  grow  over  the  next  year,  supported  by
accommodative monetary conditions and sustained U.S. demand.
BIS Review  104/1998
– 6 –
Although it may be difficult to see while we are still battling the waves of global instability, the
fact is that we are coping better this time around because our economy is in sounder shape. And
this gives me reason to remain rather positive about our economic future.
 BIS Review  104/1998
